#Chapter 4: Dinosaurs



 Theres not more than an hour of daylight left, but if  you take your notebook you may be able to get some rough sketch of the  place. Well, it might be worse! Well, we made it; but it was a  narrow squeak. Well, then you do not know how I felt at that moment. Well, so I should,  only I know there are a lot of traps for the unwary, and that stones  may be of any size and yet of little value where color and consistency  are clean off. Well, it is marked as a forked cave, and in the darkness we passed the  fork before the torches were lit. Well, that settles it. Well, if you come to think of it there are eighteen cave  openings on the hillside above us. Well, young fellah, said he, who would have thought of meetin you  up here?

 Well, its up to you to say what you will do, said he; for my part I  have a score to settle with these monkeyfolk, and if it ends by wiping  them off the face of the earth I dont see that the earth need fret  about it. Well, gentlemen, have I read you the riddle aright, or is  there any point which you would query? Well, its a fact. Well, its lucky for you, Challenger, that you ARE a little out of the  ordinary. Well, we must just go back and fetch em. Well,  that is just under apetown, and thats the jumpinoff place of their  prisoners. Well, we had a horrid business afterwards. Well, yesterday the apemen got hold of a dozen of the humans and  brought them in as prisoners. Well, we  have seen the natives themselves. Well, now, young fellah, Ill tell you what will surprise you. Well, said Challenger, I admit that my mind will be more at ease  when I am assured that the result of our expedition has been conveyed  to our friends.

 Well, it couldnt be helped. Well, said our companion, here I am. Well, we are well down Channel now. Well, neither did I. Well, I didnt ask you in here just to talk sport. Well, its an open secret  that when hes out of trainin he drinks hardstrikin an average, he  calls it. Well, its Ballingerhes the risk. Well, said he, at last, weve gone and done it, young fellah my  lad.

 Well, what do you make of  that? Well, then, I promise. Well, he  insisted, turning to me, what is it, then? We had to go quite a bit farther than usual before we could surround a  little bunch of antelope, and as I was helping drive them, I saw a fine  red deer a couple of hundred yards behind me. Well, of course, I am aware that there is not any what you might call  DEFINITE evidence. If God wills it, we shall live out our lives here. Well, sir, let us do what we can  to curtail this visit, which can hardly be agreeable to you, and is  inexpressibly irksome to me. commanded  the tugcaptain, and instantly revolvers and rifles poured bullets upon  the deck of the submersible.

 Well,  goodbye. One of these is a giant Indian maizea lofty  perennial often fifty and sixty feet in height, with ears the size of  a mans body and kernels as large as your fist. Well, thats my chair and desk. For a time  Nobs had been all the protection she required; but one day he  disappearednor has she seen him since. Well, yes; I propose to write to him. Then he raced to the rear  of the tremendous thing and seized it by the tail. Well, Im a bacteriologist, you know.

 And I doubt not but that Kho  would easily have bested me in an encounter of that sort had not Lys  voice awakened within my momentarily reverted brain the skill and  cunning of reasoning man. Well, by his insufferable rudeness and impossible behavior. For another  three days I searched north and south, east and west for the hatchetmen  of Caspak; but never a trace of them did I find. Well, Sir, anything that had adventure and danger in it. Yet I could not believe  that it was the girl. Well, perhaps if both love, it may be different. But what interested me most was the slender figure of a dainty girl,  clad only in a thin bit of muslin which scarce covered her kneesa bit  of muslin torn and ragged about the lower hem. Well, what is it that he does that I  dont do?

 Malone. Well, in the first  place, I dont think my ideal would speak like that, said she. Who knows? Well, Mr.

 Fuzzy little blackvelvet  monkeys, with snowwhite teeth and gleaming, mocking eyes, chattered at  us as we passed. Well, a bowdlerized version of it would run:  Professor Challenger  presents his compliments to the President of the Zoological Institute,  and would take it as a personal favor if he would go to the devil. And maybe it was Lys! Well, it is a translation. Even a superficial examination revealed the fact that  nothing had ever been attempted that might have improved the livability  of the cavern; nor, should I judge, had it ever been cleaned out. Well, at least  you are better than that herd of swine in Vienna, whose gregarious  grunt is, however, not more offensive than the isolated effort of the  British hog. I nodded my head in assent and crushed her to me. Well, what do you think of that? Well, sir, what is yours? Well, it is a vegetable ivory palm, and they run to  about fifty or sixty feet. Well, that is something gained, said he.

 Well, he cried, expectantly, what may it run to? Well, he became more reasonable and we had a chat. Well, I dont know about that. Well, Mr. Well, then, the photographs? Well, then, the bones? Well, perhaps its only fair. Well, it is all in the main line of my business. Well, my idea was that you and I could rush him.

 Well, when I was up  there I heard some yarns of the same kindtraditions of Indians and  the like, but with somethin behind them, no doubt. Well, suddenly out of the  darkness, out of the night, there swooped something with a swish like  an aeroplane. Well, sir, what do you propose? Well, what did they do? Well, I was telling you my tale of woe. Well, it wasnt. Well, our rope is still more than a hundred feet long, I cried. Well, within reason, said he.

 Well, just one question, I cried. Well, somethin in the lie of the land  took my notice. Well, now, in the whole world Ive only had to do with one place that  was a volcanic vent of blue clay. Well, Challenger, what will you do with  your fifty thousand? Well, Wilson, I asked. Well, well accept her challenge. Next he  touched upon the Indians, and upon the extraordinary colony of  anthropoid apes, which might be looked upon as an advance upon the  pithecanthropus of Java, and as coming therefore nearer than any known  form to that hypothetical creation, the missing link. The she is mine, he cried.

 While they are stunned, we must overcome them. Let us come among you in peace. Let me introduce you to my  husband. I asked her if she thought she could brave  the ascent, and she laughed gayly in my face. Its head was  long and thick, with a blunt muzzle, and the opening of the jaws ran  back to a point behind the eyes, and the jaws were armed with long  sharp teeth.

 Let me tell it in a few words. Its hissing rose to a shrill  scream as it raised half its body out of water onto the sloping sides  of the hull of the U33 and endeavored to scramble upon the deck to  devour us. she cried, and ran eagerly toward the base of the cliff. The last two hundred feet is over a steep incline of loose  rubble to the valley bottom, and I had just reached the top of this  when there arose to my ears an agonized cryBowen! I kill! And yet it may have been pure coincidence; my better  judgment tells me that it is coincidence that in Caspak the term for  speechless man is Alus, and in the outer world of our own day it is  Alalus. she cried. The first wave of sudden  joy which surged through me was shortlived in the face of the  swiftfollowing conviction that the one who fought below was already  doomed.

 The  wind is offshore; the tide is running out; perhaps it will be carried  into one of those numerous oceancurrents which sweep perpetually from  pole to pole and from continent to continent, to be deposited at last  upon some inhabited shore. He was a mighty  beast, mightily muscled, and the urge that has made males fight since  the dawn of life on earth filled him with the bloodlust and the thirst  to slay; but not one whit less did it fill me with the same primal  passions. He will kill  Sota if he knows that Sota aided you. Let our young friend give it a name, said Challenger. While we were attempting to lower boats, the submarine emerged and  trained guns on us. She had been the wife of Tojo. Its  strange shawl suddenly unfurled, spread, and fluttered as a pair of  leathery wings. It is a hard, fierce, dangerous life, and I shall pray always  that we shall be rescued from itfor her sake.

 Let me remind you that we came here upon a perfectly  definite mission, entrusted to us at the meeting of the Zoological  Institute in London. And  this time he jerked his head toward the north. Its long,  savage mouth, which was held halfopen, was full of a double row of  sharklike teeth. I  did not take conscious aim; and yet at each report a beast crumpled in  its tracks! Let me say in a few words how the crushing blow fell upon us. While doing  so, I shall make it my business, with infinite tact and delicacy, to  throw out a few remarks which may arouse the interest of the audience  and cause some of them to desire to go more deeply into the matter. And he jerked  his head to the south. He would give me a day to think it over; then he left,  and the women leftthe men for the hunt, and the women, as I later  learned from Sota, for the warm pool where they immersed their bodies  as did the shes of the Stolu. The sun never shone;  the rain scarcely ever ceased falling.

 While I stood stunned  and horrified at the frightful evidence before me, there came from the  direction of the great lake an increasing sound that rose to the volume  of a shriek. And I kept on in the direction of the cliffs  base. And I raised my pistol to a level with  his heart. He had to admit that he had not, and also that he was much interested  in me, my rifle and the way I had handled his three warriors. While we were with them, we saw  this same thing repeated every morning; but though we asked them why  they did it we could get no reply which was intelligible to us. Let me give you, with as much detail as I can, the sequence of events  which have led us to this catastrophe. He asked where  they were and I told him toward the south somewhere, using the  Caspakian phrase which, literally translated, means toward the  beginning. And so, as night was drawing on, I came to the  southern end of a line of cliffs loftier than any I had seen before,  and as I approached them, there was wafted to my nostrils the pungent  aroma of woodsmoke.

 She was a dear girl and a stanch and true  comrademore like a man than a woman. Its a map, and heres a cross on it. The  early light of morning was dimly filtering into the cave. It recalled me from the forgotten eon to which my brain  had flown and left me once again a modern man battling with a clumsy,  unskilled brute. She brought me all my  belongings that had been filched from merifle, ammunition, knife, and  thermos bottle, and then hand in hand we descended the cliff and set  off toward the north.

 The question puzzled me. She insisted, and I insisted; but at last we compromised. The  chiefs name was Tojo, and his household consisted of seven females  and himself. She raised one hand with the palm toward  methe Caspakian equivalent of a negative shake of the head. And he grasped his rifle and started on a run toward the lake. Then the two men went on deck through  the main hatch, and while one kept watch, the other cut a hind quarter  off Plesiosaurus Olsoni, as Bradley dubbed the thing.

 Let me see; you have given me your  promise that my confidence will be respected? The walls of the cavern to which I was  conducted were covered with drawings scratched upon the sandstone. Let me down! It was Kho of the tribe of Tsa, the hatchetmen. Then I went into the  tower and ordered full speed ahead, hoping to distance the fearsome  things; but it was useless. Its general shape was that of a shallow funnel, all the sides  sloping down to a considerable lake in the center. And let me tell you, if you have not already  realized it, the chances are a thousand to one that not one of us ever  will see the outside world again. I have three gourds which  I fill with water and take back to my cave against the long nights.

 And then it reached  out its long neck and opened its mighty jaws and grabbed for me; but I  wasnt there. And so Olsons remark helped to clear the atmosphere for the Allies at  least, and then our attention was once more directed toward the river,  for around us there had sprung up a perfect bedlam of screams and  hisses and a seething caldron of hideous reptiles, devoid of fear and  filled only with hunger and with rage. Its comrades had flown higher  at the sudden sound, and were circling above our heads. She looked at me and then turned and glanced  at my arm about her, and then she seemed quite suddenly to realize the  scantiness of her apparel and drew away, covering her face with her  palms and blushing furiously. And I pointed at a spot closer to shore. It was a long shot, a  dangerous shot, for unless one is accustomed to it, shooting from a  considerable altitude is most deceptive work. Its blocked!

 Let me down this instant! The fourth day Lys told me that she thought she felt equal to  attempting the return journey on the morrow, and so I set out for the  hunt in high spirits, for I was anxious to return to the fort and learn  if Bradley and his party had returned and what had been the result of  his expedition. Let me draw one last picture before I close the  notebooka picture which is the last memory of the old country which I  bear away with me. He asked me who I was, from whence I came and what my intentions were. The she may remain if  she is afraid, and we will keep her; but the he must depart. I reached the summit and looked out upon the broad  gray terrible Pacific of the farsouthern winter. Let me set down exactly what occurred. Let us go forward, and either die now or  live for the future in safety. And so we approached the coast upon which no living eyes had ever  rested. She told me of her abduction and of  the fright she had undergone, and together we thanked God that she had  come through unharmed, because the great brute had dared not pause  along the dangerinfested way. Let em have it!

 Let me think about it, I parried, and Tojo said that he would wait  until night. Its just the very biggest thing that I ever heard of! Then again something charged the periscope and  blotted out the mirror. Then under the bottom, wi the best o luck an give em hell! I wanted myself to die, and yet I clung to lifeuseless and  hopeless and harrowing a thing as it had become. Its not a secret, she cried. Come! Then one afternoon the girl came to me. I did not even know that they still lived; in fact, I could  not bring myself to believe that they did. The she is mine, I replied, and I have come to claim her. It was a week ago that I wrote the preceding paragraph, which I thought  would end the written record of my life upon Caprona.

 And it made me love her all the more; it made me  swear inwardly a thousand solemn oaths that I would win her. And she slipped something into my hand. And try it again we did, only to be almost rammed by a huge freighter. She told me that she had loved me from  the first, and that she never had loved von Schoenvorts, their  engagement having been arranged by her aunt for social reasons. She did not struggle to free herself; but instead her dear  arms crept up about my neck and drew my own face even closer to hers. The dirty boches are shellin the fort. She has learned to speak it, and so have I, to some extent.

 He had been a good man, but the personal loss was not  what affected me. And  I dont know the first thing about a sub. And that was the only  mention she ever made of it; yet I know that she was thankful and that  only reserve prevented her from referring to what, to say the least,  was an embarrassing situation, however unavoidable. She did not withdraw her hand, and she  looked up into my face with tears on her cheeks and I read in her eyes  the thanks her lips could not voice. He  dropped, and I ran forward to finish him with the long thin knife,  which one of the men had given me; but just as I reached him, he  staggered to his feet and ran on for another two hundred yardswhen I  dropped him again.

 He had even  shelled the fort as a parting compliment; nor could anything have been  more truly Prussian than this leavetaking of the Baron Friedrich von  Schoenvorts. And to think that I was to have married one  of thema lieutenant in the German navy. I was lost. She wasnt of the gushing type, I knew; so I didnt expect much from  her and was duly grateful for the few morsels of attention she threw  upon the floor to me. And then I let my eyes drop once more to the face upon the water, and  what I saw nearly tumbled me backward into the sea, for the eyes in the  dead face had opened; the lips had parted; and one hand was raised  toward me in a mute appeal for succor. Its deeper. he cried. And  Summerlee, too, there he was with his short briar between his thin  moustache and his gray goatsbeard, his worn face protruded in eager  debate as he queried all Challengers propositions.

 It is said that hope springs eternal in the  human breast; but there is none in mine. It is cold up here. Its love. He also  asked permission to get some dried meat and maize, saying that they  were so busy with the work of refining that they had no time to hunt. I think that I almost gave up then.

 The others slept; but I arose  and followed by Nobs went down to the stream for a plunge. He has been gone about three  days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von  Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil  about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs. I was becoming a ladies man after a lifetime of bashfulness! It is cold here today; yet here I sit watching, watching,  watching for the thing I know will never comefor a sail. ITS JUST THE VERY BIGGEST THING IN THE WORLD      V. He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and  Tippet with him. And must be unless  you had polygamy, only the other way round; you understand. And Gladysoh, my Gladys! Then I turned my attention to my own business.

 Its all so beautiful and natural until this kind of thing  comes in! E. and  interruption. She made no replyonly turned and walked  very rapidly toward her room. The next day Plesser and two other Germans  came down overland for ammunition. The U33 merely  landed those of us that were to return to the fort and then retraced  its course toward the oilwell. I will go with you to the Krolu, I replied, but then I must return  to my own people `toward the beginning. I must have lain there bound and uncomfortable for two or three hours  when at last Sota entered the cave. Its nature. So we decided to construct a palisaded camp.

 Its nobody in particular, she explained, laughing at the expression  of my face: only an ideal. You see, I cried to his fellows, that I can kill you wherever you  may be. And now I turn to the last supreme eventful moment of our adventure. He says  that there are many Galus north of us, and that as soon as he becomes  one he will go and live with them. Its for men to do them, and for  women to reserve their love as a reward for such men. )  If the audience had done less than justice, surely it  made ample amends. Its just what I want. Suddenly it rained apes.

 I realized that she was quite  rightthat we were but comic figures hopping from the cradle to the  grave, of interest to practically no other created thing than ourselves  and our few intimates. Then other footsteps sounded, approaching me. Then he  explained that the U33 would cruise in these waters for a time,  sinking neutral and enemy shipping indiscriminately, and looking for  one of the German raiders that was supposed to be in these parts. She felt the submergence of the  boat and came out of her room to investigate. I pondered a long time upon all that I had heard, before  sleep came to me. He calls us Galus and says that in a short time he  will be a Galu. And yet the day may come when I would not have it otherwise.

 She looked at me with a puzzled expression on her face for the barest  fraction of a second, and then she turned and went up the ladder. He was unharmed except  for minor bruises; but he was the most chastened dog I have ever seen. It was late in the morning. Its really awfully good of you to give me a  lift. This is what I read:      HERE LIES JOHN TIPPET ENGLISHMAN KILLED BY TYRANNOSAURUS    10 SEPT.

 It is forbidden. I leaped between them while he was still kicking  her, and obtaining a quick hold upon him, dragged him screaming with  pain from the cave. I was loath  to lose so much time; but the fellow was obdurate, and so I accompanied  them. And so, in humble and thankful mood, I close this account. And you, Summerlee? Then I saw her frame convulse, shudderingly, her  muscles reacting to her rapidly lowering temperature, and casting  prudery to the winds, I threw myself down beside her and took her in my  arms, pressing her body close to mine. I  refused to give him my rifle, but promised to show him the trick he  wished to learn if he would guide me in the right direction.

 And you, Challenger? He eyed me in that disagreeable way of his and demanded to know, in  case they accepted my suggestion, what their status would be in event  of our finding a way to escape with the U33. It was humiliating, but it was true. Then it is settled, said Lord John, and turning to the chief he  nodded and slapped his rifle. I do not know who the Galus may  be; I have never seen them. The  mind of man can scarce conceive the plethora of carnivorous life in  this lost world; and their prey, of course, is even more abundant. And now come the  apemen and the Indian.

 I dont like to appear conceited, but I may as well admit  that I am proud of my strength and the science that I have acquired and  developed in the directing of itthat and my horsemanship I always  have been proud of. she cried. The following morning we started building operations in earnest, and  things progressed finely. Its not the first time, either, said the policeman, severely,  shaking his head. I  would find them; they would direct me to the cliffs; perhaps they would  accompany me and take us back with them to their abodesto the abodes  of men and women like ourselves.

 Its all bosh. He had been wont at home to enter the surf with me, and evidently  he had not forgotten it. He could make no landing; nor in the  several days he cruised about it did he see sign of life. And yet I felt happier than I had done since  this crushing blow had fallen upon me, for it was good to think that  the world should know what we had done, so that at the worst our names  should not perish with our bodies, but should go down to posterity  associated with the result of our labors.

 She looked at me in wideeyed consternation for a moment, and then she  went very white and rose from her seat. It was  the sole remaining thread of the ancient woof of a dawning culture  which had been woven when Caprona was a fiery mount upon a great  landmass teeming with life. It was a little mound of newturned earth sprinkled with  flowers long since withered, and at one end was a flat slab of  sandstone stuck in the ground. And suddenly there came something to remind me of my absent companions. The sailor immediately straightened up, faced his officer, clicked his  heels together and saluted. Its the last thing you young fellahs  think of learnin. It  was a cloudy day, though warm, as it always is in Caspak. It was an hour later before the tribe began to stir about. The following morning we commenced work upon our camp, Bradley, Olson,  von Schoenvorts, Miss La Rue, and I having sat up half the night  discussing the matter and drawing plans. I went on in the direction I thought was south but which I now imagine  must have been about due north, without detecting a single familiar  object.

 Its funny we should both sail under sealed  orders from a man we dont know. It was too dark to do more than this. Then he pointed  to us. She had signaled us to stop, and our  skipper had ignored the order; but now she had her gun trained on us,  and the second shot grazed the cabin, warning the belligerent  tugcaptain that it was time to obey. Its old man Challengers show and we are here by his good will, so it  would be rotten bad form if we didnt follow his instructions to the  letter. She could not  have lived through another night upon the Channel; she might not have  lived through the coming day. It appeared to me, as I afterward learned was the fact,  that I was witnessing the most primitive of marriage ceremonies. I must have gone about a mile before the  truth dawned upon meI was lost, hopelessly lost.

 It appeared to stand out  in marked contrast and incongruity to all its surroundings, and when I  stopped to examine it, I found that it was a small strip of  muslinpart of the hem of a garment. Then where the dooce did they drop from? I called a few times and waited, but there was no  response and no one came. She had  turned her head during the night so that as I opened my eyes I saw her  face not an inch from mine, my lips almost touching hers.

 She shook her head. I know it  now, and how far we were from guessing the wonderful, the miraculous,  the gigantic truth which even yet I may only guess atthe thing that  sets Caspak apart from all the rest of the world far more definitely  than her isolated geographical position or her impregnable barrier of  giant cliffs. The creature appeared to be more  impressed with Nobs than by us and our firearms, for it stopped as the  Airedale dashed at it growling, and struck at him viciously with its  powerful jaws. She was not dead!

 The creature in our  rear was gaining on us rapidly when Nobs flew past me like a meteor and  rushed straight for the frightful reptile. It was a beautiful, gently rolling country, broken by  occasional outcroppings of sandstone and by patches of dense forest  relieved by open, parklike stretches and broad meadows whereon grazed  countless herbivorous animalsred deer, aurochs, and infinite variety  of antelope and at least three distinct species of horse, the latter  ranging in size from a creature about as large as Nobs to a magnificent  animal fourteen to sixteen hands high. she said. It seemed incredible that man could be so perfidiousthat we  had really seen with our own eyes the thing that we had seen; but when  we returned to the fort, the shattered wall gave us ample evidence that  there was no mistake. Then they  fell back from the edge, formed themselves again into line, and waited  for the next victim. Its a  name for any kind of devil. Then we had very different things to think of, for  an active drama was in progress. The creature appeared to be a great lizard at least ten  feet high, with a huge, powerful tail as long as its torso, mighty hind  legs and short forelegs. She drew back her hands.

 The  deer lay in a small open space close to a clump of acacias, and we had  advanced to within several yards of our kill when we both halted  suddenly and simultaneously. And then suddenly, with a  crashing and a rending, a thudding of giant feet and a panting of  monster lungs the beast was upon me once more. Then  we shall see whether we cant get back to their town and hit em where  it hurts most. I asked. He is scarcely mentioned even by  contemporaneous historiansprobably because he got into political  difficulties on his return to Italy. Its better to learn wisdom before you get into a  cookinpot; so we will content ourselves with hopin that there is no  trouble waitin for us, and at the same time we will act as if there  were. It was Olson who first  recovered from his daze sufficiently to guess the explanation of the  phenomenon. Then suddenly I saw it. I asked them if they knew Ahm; but they said they did not. he asked. It was Whitely who discovered the first cluea huge humanlike  footprint in the soft earth beside the spring, and indications of a  struggle in the mud.

 Then from out of the silence,  imminent and threatening, there came once more that low, throaty  croaking, far louder and closer than before. And now I was coming into my  own. She was altered in some  subtle way. He remained defiant almost to the last; but  just before he went out, he motioned to me, and I leaned over to catch  the faintly whispered words. It was  daylight when I awoke. The Germans among us might kill  all the English, or the English might kill the last German, without  affecting in the slightest degree either the outcome of even the  smallest skirmish upon the western front or the opinion of a single  individual in any belligerent or neutral country. And I venture to trust we may not, I observed. its  foot was so much larger than an ostrichs that its height upon the same  scale must be enormous. And then,  under this highpitched, ringing sound there was another, more  intermittent, a low, deepchested laugh, a growling, throaty gurgle of  merriment which formed a grotesque accompaniment to the shriek with  which it was blended. He would sacrifice  anyone, even you; and if you still love him, you might be his ready  tool.

 It is beginning  to pall on us. It  took a long time to build that wall, and we all turned in and helped  except von Schoenvorts, who, by the way, had not spoken to me except in  the line of official business since our encountera condition of armed  neutrality which suited me to a T. I showed them the  thermosbottle, and when I poured a little water from it, they were  delighted, thinking that it was a spring which I carried about with  mea neverfailing source of water supply. Then it came back, to me. It was the first  time that she had spoken thus to me. He was rather an intelligent fellow of the  English middle class, in whom I had much confidence. Its up to you, young fellah, to name the lake, said he. she wailed. The line was made fast to a small tree, and at the same time I had  the stern anchor dropped.

 I had  laid aside my ammunitionbelt and rifle, though both were close beside  me; but my pistol I kept in my lap beneath my hand. And where? Then it dived, and I saw it no more. The game, however, seemed wary; for the instant the animals  discovered us, they threw up their heads and tails and went cavorting  off, those farther inland following the example of the others until all  were lost in the mazes of the distant forest. I had matches with me, and in the light of one I found a  small cavern with a flat roof and floor which followed the cleavage of  the strata. It is full, it is satisfying, it is  ennobling. I placed a foot upon the lowest ledge and clambered upward, reaching  down and pulling Lys to my side. he asked. And yet it was all over in a flash, and there was no sequel to it, save  in our own convictions. Then Lord John threw a bundle of  twigs upon the fire, and their red glare lit up the intent faces of my  companions and flickered over the great boughs above our heads. I do not fear you, screamed the creature.

 She was confused, but not unduly so. It couldnt have hurt him, for it didnt leave a mark; but  he flew into a terrific rage, shouting: Attention! Then it shut off as suddenly as it began. I seized a brand from the fire and hurled it out  into the night, and there came back an answering chorus of savage and  rageful protest; but the eyes vanished for a short time. The water was quite free from reptiles, and  the vegetation upon the banks of the river had altered to more open and  parklike forest, with eucalyptus and acacia mingled with a scattering  of tree ferns, as though two distinct periods of geologic time had  overlapped and merged. I saw that she was upon the verge of a  breakdown, after all that she must have passed through of fear and  horror that day, and I tried to quiet and reassure her as best I might;  but even to me the future looked most unpromising, for what chance of  life had we against the frightful hunters of the night who even now  were prowling closer to us?

 He looked at me  quizzically. He is the German  of whom I spoke, she said. It consisted  of upward of five hundred individuals representing several species  closely allied to man. And then suddenly we perceived  something which filled us with new hope. Then suddenly out of the whizzing,  slatecolored circle a long neck shot out, and a fierce beak made a  thrust at us. And now, having demonstrated this important  conclusion so that it is clear to anyone, however prejudiced or obtuse,  I am of opinion that we cannot do better than break up our camp and  travel to westward until we find some means of ascent. It was grazing away from us and had not  seen us when one of my men called my attention to it.

 Then he stood staring as if forgetting us, so  utterly entranced was he by what he saw. Then it slowly drew inwards and disappeared. Its  three or four miles from here. And now, my readers, if ever I have any, I have brought you up the  broad river, and through the screen of rushes, and down the green  tunnel, and up the long slope of palm trees, and through the bamboo  brake, and across the plain of treeferns. He lowered his head  and rushed at me, bellowing like a bull. The trees were full of monkeys of all  sizes and shades, and once we thought we saw a manlike creature  watching us from the depth of the forest. Then at last  Summerlee, with his sneer and his pipe, would move forwards, and  Challenger would come rolling and grumbling after. He got up, stretched, turned around  a few times and lay down again, and the girl opened her eyes and looked  into mine.

 It was further understood that we were to act as a military  organization under military rules and disciplineI as commander, with  Bradley as my first lieutenant and Olson as my second, in command of  the Englishmen; while von Schoenvorts was to act as an additional  second lieutenant and have charge of his own men. she screamed. And now my patient readers, I can address you directly no longer. I kill!

 The girl ate with us that night at the little officers mess just back  of the torpedo compartment. It was more the heat of a steamroom than of an  oven. I was close enough to hear his words, which  were similar to the language of Ahm, though much fuller, for there were  many words I could not understand. I should  say that they were a little higher in the scale of evolution than Ahm,  possibly occupying a place of evolution between that of the Neanderthal  man and what is known as the Grimaldi race. Its among the trees there. The thing didnt have sufficient brainpan to entertain more than  a single idea at once. He prices the lot at a minimum of two  hundred thousand pounds. The thing stopped then and looked at me a moment as much as to say:  Why this thing has a stinger! Its over, said Lord John. Then we distributed the various burdens among  usguns, ammunition, food, a tent, blankets, and the restand,  shouldering our packages, we set forth upon the more laborious stage of  our journey. The long neck was far outstretched, and the four  flippers with which it swam were working with powerful strokes,  carrying it forward at a rapid pace.

 Then so you shall. And why shouldnt we be the men to find it out? She looked at me with rather more interest. You cannot harm me as you harmed Tsa. The tall, fernlike trees were alive with monkeys, snakes,  and lizards. He took a pillbox from his pocket, and spilled out of it a beautiful  glittering diamond, one of the finest stones that I have ever seen. The tide was running out, and this, together with the  strong flow of the freshwater current, would have prevented our going  against the cliffs even had we not been under power; as it was we had  to buck the combined forces in order to hold our position at all. It seemed strange that beyond  the buttressed walls of Caprona icebergs floated and the south wind was  biting, for only a gentle breeze moved across the face of these living  waters, and that was damp and warm. Its shoulders were humped, and round them were  draped what appeared to be a faded gray shawl. It was some time  before we could persuade the girl to continue her meal, but at last  Bradley prevailed upon her, pointing out that we had come upstream  nearly forty miles since the boche had been seized, and that during  that time we had seen literally thousands of these denizens of the  river, indicating that the chances were very remote that this was the  same Plesiosaur. She looked so beautiful in her enthusiasm that I nearly brought down  the whole level of the interview.

 It gave one a feeling of newness that was  almost embarrassing, although it didnt seem to embarrass our  appetites. The mornings search brought us no shred of hope. It had been weeks, now,  since we had tasted it, and the sight of the reptiles gave me an  ideathat a steak or two from one of them might not be bad eating. He opened his cigarbox, and tilting it over he poured about twenty or  thirty rough stones, varying from the size of beans to that of  chestnuts, on the table.

 and Shame! The countenance might have been that of a cross  between Pithecanthropus, the Java apeman, and a daughter of the  Piltdown race of prehistoric Sussex. Its owner grabbed at its legs, but too late to hold  it. I have not  looked upon it sincenor in all likelihood shall I ever look upon it  again. And then, sir, what did you do next? It charged us as savagely as a mad bull, and one would have  thought it intended to destroy and devour the mighty Uboat, as I  verily believe it did intend. It turned its eyes upon us,  opened its lizardlike mouth, emitted a shrill hiss and came for us. She laughed at the elasticity of my character. People  dont stumble upon enormous discoveries and then lose their evidence. It is fair to assume that inland  the river is fed by pure streams, that there are fruits and herbs and  game. he said.

 She looked at me with a wondering distrust which was much more to my  mind than her wholehearted confidence. It flows through a land covered with  vegetationand therefore a land upon which the sun shines. Its large toes protruded laterally as do those of the semiarboreal  peoples of Borneo, the Philippines and other remote regions where low  types still persist. It  cant come from the ocean; so it must come from the land.

 It must  have been about two bells of the afternoon watch that Bradley called my  attention to the branch of a tree, with leaves upon it, floating on the  sea. I received no  response, though I finally pounded with all my strength; then I turned  the knob and entered, only to find that she was not there. The  carcass was badly swollen and partly decomposed. The beach was composed  largely of small stones worn smooth by the action of water. It was the body of  a low type of man or a high type of beast. She nodded severely. You do not  belong among us.

 And now I am gladso  gladif it wakens these thoughts in you! I went to my own room, and there I sat by the light of one of the crude  candles we had made from the tallow of the beasts we had killed, and  lived over the events of the evening. and perhaps after all  it is only a feeling peculiar to myself. But  here were intermingled the voices of later erasthe scream of the  panther, the roar of the lion, the baying of wolves and a thunderous  growling which we could attribute to nothing earthly but which one day  we were to connect with the most fearsome of ancient creatures. I cried. It was a long slim blade he offeredone that I could carry between my  teethand so I accepted it gladly. Then he drew out a map of South America and laid it on the  table.

 She put forward a handsuch a gracious,  stooping attitude it wasand she pressed back my head. Dont you be scared, my bonnie boy, said Lord John, patting the  matted head in front of him. The clifftops, though ragged, were of such uniform height as to  suggest the boundaries of a great plateau, and now and again we caught  glimpses of verdure topping the rocky escarpment, as though bush or  jungleland had pushed outward from a lush vegetation farther inland to  signal to an unseeing world that Caprona lived and joyed in life beyond  her austere and repellent coast. He stared at me with a hopeless expression upon his vacuous,  goodnatured, scrubby little face.

 Then with a little confidential  chuckle of laughter, he patted me two or three times on the chest,  finally pushing me back into my chair. The needle was pointing  straight toward the land. She sat with that proud, delicate profile of hers outlined against the  red curtain. I am alone upon  the summit of the great cliff overlooking the broad Pacific. The  sight of land filled us with renewed hope. Its the subterranean channel of an  inland river, I cried. I have tried on several occasions to broach the subject of my love to  Lys; but she will not listen. The long and the short of it was that we cruised about aimlessly  until the sun came out again. Then I move, said Professor Challenger, that both these gentlemen be  elected, as representatives of this meeting, to accompany Professor  Summerlee upon his journey to investigate and to report upon the truth  of my statements.

 And yet how aloof! If I had stumbled upon the grave of one of the party, was it not  within reason to believe that the bones of the others lay scattered  somewhere near? She  could but refuse me, and better be a repulsed lover than an accepted  brother. Why,  man, they dont come north of fourteen here in these waters. Then he pictured the solidification, the cooling,  the wrinkling which formed the mountains, the steam which turned to  water, the slow preparation of the stage upon which was to be played  the inexplicable drama of life. The wind of that night brought on some pretty rough weather with a lot  of black clouds which persisted for several days.

 It was she who closed  the divingtank seacocks and roused Olson and me, and had the pumps  started to empty them. Then for Heavens sake, man, write it up! The suspense was more wearing than that which  I had endured while waiting for dissolution. She did unbend a little. Mental inertia! It did not take me long to liberate myself, and then I  was at her side. Then the Zoological Institutes Hall at  eightthirty tonight.

 I had to smile as I read Bradleys report. And Lady Stanley! Had the halfbreed simply wrought his vengeance and then escaped, all  might have been well with him. She gave me her hand; but with such sweetness and dignity that  I could only stoop and kiss it. Im goin to get a young devil chick for  Challenger. And yet it is so real with me, so  entirely part of my very self, that I cannot help acting upon it. In a moment the three would charge! The throbbing of the  engines ceased, and in its stead came the steady vibration of the  electric motors.

 The drop to the triangular  deck forward of the conningtower might easily have broken a leg for  me, or I might have slipped off onto the deck and rolled overboard; but  fate was upon my side, as I was only slightly bruised. He admitted that the  members of the committee were men of character. She laughed at my sudden Irish effervescence. At first she frightened me; but  presently I was aware that she was quite as safe here as was I. I quit about a week ago and commenced  working on this chronicle for our strange adventures, which will  account for any minor errors in chronology which may have crept in;  there was so much material that I may have made some mistakes, but I  think they are but minor and few. she said.

 It  turned out to be quite the most exciting adventure I had ever  encountered. He much regretted that any personal bias should have been  read into his remarks, which were entirely dictated by his desire for  scientific truth. Then your case is not hopeless. It was daylight when I awoke. And if I do    Her dear hand rested like warm velvet upon my lips. Then I must confess that I dont know what it is. She was a bright,  vivacious, darkeyed lady, more French than English in her type. We all come from there, he said. I know how difficult your position is, I said; but dont feel that  you are alone.

 The sea was calm except for the white water at  our bows and the two long radiating swells running far off into the  distance upon either hand astern, forming a great V which our  propellers filled with choppy waves. I imagine that I am frightened and  blue, she said, and I know that I am very, very homesick and lonely. Then came a picture of a cheerful  and corpulent ecclesiastic in a shovel hat, sitting opposite a very  thin European, and the inscription:  Lunch with Fra Cristofero at  Rosario. The  Englishman struck the fellow a frantic blow upon the neck and at the  same time snatched his pistol from its holster. I inquired. Then a subtitle, Glimpse of a singular  menage. Then Id better try my luck with the original. Challenger had been in the habit of walking off by himself every  morning and returning from time to time with looks of portentous  solemnity, as one who bears the full weight of a great enterprise upon  his shoulders. I dont like irony, she said; it indicates a small soul. I realize as never before how cheap and  valueless a thing is life.

 The girl accompanied us, and when she saw the thing I had  in mind, she stepped forward and lent a hand to the swinging of the  great cylinder of death and destruction into the mouth of its tube. I gave the order to  fire, and at the first volley six of them went down, including the  Neanderthal man. Then she  looked into my upturned face with a very wistful smile. You are here for but an instant, and you mustnt take yourself too  seriously. It was another two days before we were ready to limp along, half  repaired.

 I did not wish to fire among them unless it became absolutely  necessary, and so I started to lead my party around them; but the  instant that the Neanderthal man guessed my intention, he evidently  attributed it to cowardice upon our part, and with a wild cry he leaped  toward us, waving his cudgel above his head. I set off at a rapid run in the direction of  the harbor. She barred her  husbands way like an enraged chicken in front of a bulldog. Take  Tsas hole, which lies above you. It was wide open. And so it was that I found myself that foggy November evening pursuing  the Camberwell tram with my heart glowing within me, and with the eager  determination that not another day should elapse before I should find  some deed which was worthy of my lady. I afterward learned that he  had served three years on the trafficsquad of the Chicago police force. The girl was coming almost  at a runshe was at my side immediately. And that telegony is still sub judice? Bradley did not return; nor  did we have any word from von Schoenvorts.

 The first time she hesitated as though she wished to speak to  me; but I did not raise my head, and finally she passed on. The  sailing ship saw us while we were still a long way off, as was  evidenced by her efforts to escape. It seemed to me that the divingtanks never had filled so slowly. He then thrilled the  assembly by some account of the terrible carnivorous dinosaurs, which  had on more than one occasion pursued members of the party, and which  were the most formidable of all the creatures which they had  encountered. And that the germ plasm is different from the parthenogenetic egg?

 I told him to wait until I gave the word; then we would fire  simultaneously, he at the heart and I at the spine. And I may come? and an inoffensive little person in  spectacles, struggling violently, was held up among a group of  students. It proved itself such that morning, for I had scarce  gotten into my dry clothes and taken the girls apparel to the  captains cabin when an order was shouted down into the engineroom for  full speed ahead, and an instant later I heard the dull boom of a gun. He would only add, before he  sat down, that he rejoicedand all of them would rejoicethat these  gentlemen had returned safe and sound from their difficult and  dangerous task, for it cannot be denied that any disaster to such an  expedition would have inflicted a wellnigh irreparable loss to the  cause of Zoological science. She was seated in a low settee under the shaded  standard lamp by the piano. I then had arms and ammunition issued to the Germans, and leaving  Bradley and five men to guard the U33, the balance of us went ashore.

 He would not, he said,  stand for more than a moment between that vast assembly and the treat  which lay before them. Then I had what I can only regard as an inspiration. If he succeeds, we shall have the means for  leaving Caspak and returning to our own world. I told them that it was obvious our very existence  depended upon our unity of action, that we were to all intent and  purpose entering a new world as far from the seat and causes of our own  worldwar as if millions of miles of space and eons of time separated  us from our past lives and habitations.

 She looked up with amazement in her face. The Germans would be crazy to do  it, for their lives are as much at stake as ours. The fellow scratched his head a moment and said, No,  and then as though it was an afterthought, he told me that he had seen  the girl in the crews room about midnight talking with the German  commander, but as there hadnt seemed to him to be any harm in that, he  hadnt said anything about it. I was mighty glad  that our entrance into the interior of Caprona had been inside a  submarine rather than in any other form of vessel. And so, amid shouting and cheering, our fate was decided, and I found  myself borne away in the human current which swirled towards the door,  with my mind half stunned by the vast new project which had risen so  suddenly before it. And here we are, up to our necks in  the tureen. And goodbye to you also,  Professor Summerlee. I  saw I could do nothing with her unless I exerted force, and so I turned  with my back toward her that I might be in a position to shield her  from the strange reptile should it really succeed in reaching the deck;  and as I did so I saw the thing raise one flipper over the rail, dart  its head forward and with the quickness of lightning seize upon one of  the boches. The sextant and chronometer had both been  broken beyond repair,  and they had been broken just this very night.