#Chapter 5: Pirates, Vikings, Aliens, and Dinosaurs



 The tale is told that the king, as he swam beneath the cover of his shield, stripped off his armour and, making his way to the land, went away on a pilgrimage to Rome. The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all that I know, where Flint buried them; and certainly they shall lie there for me. The man counted. The arrow hit Einars famous bow in the middle and broke it with a loud snap.

 The arrow flew from the string and went straight to its mark. The viking stumbled, and Thorstein snatched up the half of a broken oar and wielding it above his head rushed among the vikings, belabouring them right and left. The clang of weapons was now at its highest. The water was strewn with wreckage, an arrow floated on every wave. The eyes of the two bravest of Norse warriors met. The kings men were well nigh exhausted with the long days fighting under the hot sun; their bronzed faces streamed with perspiration, their limbs moved wearily. The heavy, iron bound bow of the Ram crashed into the broadside of Olafs outermost longship, whose timber creaked and groaned under the impact. The clang of the weapons upon the metal shields, the dull thud of blows, the wild shouts of the warriors and cries of the wounded, mingled together in a loud vibrating murmur. The wind had fallen, the sea was calm; the sun hung hot and glaring in a cloudless sky, flashing on burnished helmet and gilded dragon head. The larger number of his chosen chiefsas Kolbiorn Stallare, Thorfinn the Dashing, Ketil the Tall, and Thorstein Oxfoothad their stations forward on the forecastle deck or in the close quarters nearer the prow.

 The armaments, fitted in no fewer than nine successive efforts, were mostly equipped with such haste and ignorance, and with so little choice, that ruinous delays, shipwrecks, and final discomfiture, were naturally to be expected. The taste for depredation had become so general and contagious, that privateers were now allowed to be fitted out, which equipments quickly degenerated to the most cruel of pirates. The foremost of these were the Venetians and Genoese, among whom the private adventurers, stimulated by an enterprising spirit, fitted out armaments, and volunteered themselves into the service of those nations who thought proper to retain them; or they engaged in such schemes of plunder as were likely to repay their pains and expense. The success of this freebooter shows that the Eastern emperors could no longer protect, or even assist, their islands. The King answered: I had the Serpent built longer than other ships, so that she might be put forward more boldly in battle, and be well known in fighting as in sailing. The seamen were now lashing the ships together stem by stem. The eleven dragons had been ranged side by side as he had ordered, with the Long Serpent in the middle and the Crane and the Short Serpent at either side of her. The rising sun shone red upon the mans skin. The cases of ammunition and of food were scattered about in a wild litter, together with our unfortunate cameras and platecarriers, but none of them were missing.

 The rifles still lay upon the ground, and one of themLord Johnshad the empty cartridge in the breech. The whole disordered appearance of the camp showed that there had been some sort of attack, and the rifleshot no doubt marked the time when it had occurred. The horrible thought that I might never see them again, that I might find myself abandoned all alone in that dreadful place, with no possible way of descending into the world below, that I might live and die in that nightmare country, drove me to desperation. The stars were fading, the sky was whitening, and the cold wind of morning blew pleasantly upon my face. The countenance might have been that of a cross between Pithecanthropus, the Java apeman, and a daughter of the Piltdown race of prehistoric Sussex. The carcass was badly swollen and partly decomposed. The beach was composed largely of small stones worn smooth by the action of water. The post in the center, some nine feet long, was sharpened at the upper end, and was black with the stale blood of the creatures who had been impaled upon it. The path lay still behind me.

 The ground shook beneath his tremendous weight, and his gulpings of water resounded through the still night. The night had been exceedingly still, but as I advanced I became conscious of a low, rumbling sound, a continuous murmur, somewhere in front of me. The trees grew so thickly and their foliage spread so widely that I could see nothing of the moonlight save that here and there the high branches made a tangled filigree against the starry sky. The full moon was shining brightly, and the air was crisply cold. The aspect of the place in the dusk was singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, redtinged with the weed. The red weed was less abundant; the tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper. The crowd of onlookers was very large, for among the Northmen no amusement was more popular than the horse fight, unless it were the combat between men.

 The inadequate boat finally arrived at a precarious landing, the natives, waistdeep in the surf, assisting. The disappearance of Olaf Triggvison was scarcely remarked by the Norwegians, who were at that time holding high revel in celebration of their victory. The man took the beautiful hair in his two hands and held it fast, while Olaf stretched forth his neck. The man who was to act as executioner was one Thorkel Leira, a stalwart warrior, who had done great deeds in the battle. The pretty women in Borgund holm will not now be so fond of kissing me, said he. The spears and arrows whizzed about the head of Earl Hakon, and his coat of mail was so rent and cut that it fell off from him. The Indians were so terrified at it that they would not go near the place, and, though we twice made expeditions and saw it each time, we could not make our way through the deep marsh in which it lived.

 The point of the blade passed in at his breast and out between his shoulders, and at the same instant the battleaxe fell. The other bounded round in an eccentric circle with shrill, wailing cries, and then lying down writhed in agony for some minutes before it also stiffened and lay still. The wretched Indians screamed with terror, but were helpless, run as they would, before the relentless purpose and horrible activity of these monstrous creatures. The two vessels floated close together, the oars were shipped, and there, in the grey prosaic early morning light, they heaved gently on the North Sea swell, and awaited the approach of the ten. The blackbearded man looked at him with an air of some astonishment, and then answered shortly,  They call me Ketill; but what is that to you? The party by this time were so close that they had perforce to halt, with some clash of armour, and again their captain cried,  Are you deaf? The morning sun glanced on their helmets and coats of mail, and in the still air the clash of preparation rang far up the pineclad hillside.

 The Indians now could only shake their heads and shrug their shoulders when we expressed by signs our desire to descend. The victory of the Indians and the annihilation of the apemen, marked the turning point of our fortunes. The air was calm, full of the eternal hum of insects, a tropical chorus of many octaves, from the deep drone of the bee to the high, keen pipe of the mosquito. The chief of these we called Mojo, after his tribe, and the others are known as Jose and Fernando. The first is a gigantic negro named Zambo, who is a black Hercules, as willing as any horse, and about as intelligent. The captain had risen earlier than usual and set out down the beach, his cutlass swinging under the broad skirts of the old blue coat, his brass telescope under his arm, his hat tilted back upon his head.

 The doctor never so much as moved. The old fellows fury was awful. The exploits of the Red Chief, as they called him, had become legends among them, but the real facts, as far as I could learn them, were amazing enough. The scientific attainments of Professor Summerlee are too well known for me to trouble to recapitulate them. The preliminary exploration team had established the fact that the planet was more or less Earthtype, that its air was breathable, its temperature agreeably springlike, its mineral composition very similar to Earths, with only slight traces of unknown elements, that there was plenty of drinkable water and no threatening lifeforms. The Tasmanians, in spite of their human likeness, were entirely swept out of existence in a war of extermination waged by European immigrants, in the space of fifty years. The meaning of the phrase high seas, embraces not only the waters of the ocean, which are out of sight of land, but the waters on the sea coast below low water mark, whether within the territorial boundaries of a foreign nation, or of a domestic state.

 Seven of King Sweyns vessels did he thus clear; and at last no more came, and for a time he had rest. The pirate is truly fond of women and wine, and when not engaged in robbing, keeps maddened with intoxicating liquors, and passes his time in debauchery, singing old songs with chorusses like    Drain, drain the bowl, each fearless soul,     Let the world wag as it will:   Let the heavens growl, let the devil howl,     Drain, drain the deep bowl and fill. Never before did I thus miss a man! The pirate, from the perilous nature of his occupation, when not cruising on the ocean, the great highway of nations, selects the most lonely isles of the sea for his retreat, or secretes himself near the shores of rivers, bays and lagoons of thickly wooded and uninhabited countries, so that if pursued he can escape to the woods and mountain glens of the interior.

 Sure enough, he was squatting among his blankets beside his fire in his little camp. The sunlight shone upon his fair young face. A cry that was half a groan escaped Earl Eriks lips. The boy turned sharply and looked at the man who had spoken. There was still a most fierce fight going on between the earls men and Olafs champions.

 The other three had gone down with the boat. Brave and strong though they were, they could not withstand the furious onslaught of the ambitious and valiant Earl Erik. The other three took complete headers, and came up again drenched and bubbling. Outside the narrow lines of the rivers what does anyone know? The report fell in at the same instant of time. I said today that he would not gain victory over us if he had the image of Thor in his stem.

 The ebbtide, which had so cruelly delayed us, was now making reparation and delaying our assailants. It is Olaf the King! The cry he gave was echoed not only by his companions on board but by a great number of voices from the shore, and looking in that direction I saw the other pirates trooping out from among the trees and tumbling into their places in the boats. They surrounded the Serpent like a pack of eager wolves held at bay; and the most eager of all men there present was Earl Erik. The gig was no longer to be feared; the little point had already concealed it from our eyes. So the earl decided to make one more effort after the victory and to risk his all in a final hand to hand encounter with the King of the Norsemen. The one source of danger was the gun. They immediately passed over to Ireland, and divided it into three sovereignties; that of Dublin fell to the share of Olauf; that of Waterford to Sitrih; and that of Limerick to Yivar. The islands of the Indian Ocean, and the east and west coasts of Africa, as well as the West Indies, have been their haunts for centuries; and vessels navigating the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, are often captured by them, the passengers and crew murdered, the money and most valuable part of the cargo plundered, the vessel destroyed, thus obliterating all trace of their unhappy fate, and leaving friends and relatives to mourn their loss from the inclemencies of the elements, when they were butchered in cold blood by their fellow men, who by practically adopting the maxim that dead men tell no tales, enable themselves to pursue their diabolical career with impunity.

 There was no lack of arrows on the Short Serpent, or indeed, on any other of King Olafs battleships. The current of the river is a slight one, the drop being not greater than eight inches in a mile. The intellectual side of man already admits that life is an incessant struggle for existence, and it would seem that this too is the belief of the minds upon Mars. The voices stopped at once, all but Dr. The captain glared at him for a while, flapped his hand again, glared still harder, and at last broke out with a villainous, low oath, Silence, there, between decks! The unknown is up against us on every side. The path was very narrow at that point, and he of the black beard called out gruffly,  Make way, old man!

 The fates, however, were against them. The most that we could do was to check their progress by distracting their attention with the flash and roar of our guns, and so to give both the natives and ourselves time to reach the steps which led to safety. The great reptilian hearts, however, each as large as a cushion, still lay there, beating slowly and steadily, with a gentle rise and fall, in horrible independent life. The edge of the shield was cut through like paper, and the blade coming fair on the nape of the Hooknoses neck, the bodies of the two champions rolled together off the gangway. The line was broken, and five and twenty of their ships followed in the wake of Earl Sigvaldi. The lads call me Ole the Esthonian, Olaf replied. The two horses rose high on their hind legs, biting at each other savagely until their manes and necks and shoulders were torn and bloody. The combat went on until eleven rounds had passed. The vessel rocked as though the sea beneath it had been uptorn by a mighty volcano. The silence which followed the detonation of the exploding torpedo was almost equally horrifying.

 The Martians seem to have calculated their descent with amazing subtletytheir mathematical learning is evidently far in excess of oursand to have carried out their preparations with a wellnigh perfect unanimity. The darkness of the forest had been alarming, but even worse was the white, still flood of moonlight in the open glade of the iguanodons. The air above it was shimmering with heat, and the ground round was so hot that I could hardly bear to lay my hand on it. The first thing which I saw filled me with amazement. The moonlight shone upon his huge projecting eyes, the row of enormous teeth in his open mouth, and the gleaming fringe of claws upon his short, powerful forearms. The atmosphere was poisonous and horrible. The remains scattered about were fragments of the victims, which had been cut away in order to clear the stake for the next who might blunder in. The surf was not heavy, and there was no undertow, so we made shore easily, effecting an equally easy landing.

 The creature must have been about the height of a fair sized man; its features were similar to those of a man; yet had it been a man? The sloping wall of the pit was not difficult for an active man to climb, but I hesitated long before I trusted myself within reach of the dreadful creature which had so nearly destroyed me. The zareba rose before me, even as I had left it, but the gate was open. The blankets of Challenger and of Summerlee beside the fire suggested that they had been asleep at the time. The more I tried to think it out with my confused and weary brain the less could I find any plausible explanation. The son of Queen Sigrid the Haughty stands in need of a little practice in warfare, said Olaf. The king had a bow in his hand. The king lowered the arrow and did not shoot.

 The first attempt of this powerful gang was upon England, where, finding Alfred too powerful to be coped with, he stood over to the mouth of the Seine, and availed himself of the state to which France was reduced. The sovereign, however, did not possess sufficient naval means to suppress the enormities of the great predatory squadrons, and their ravages continued to disgrace the English name for upwards of twenty years, when the valor and conciliation of the gallant Prince Edward brought them to that submission which his royal parent had failed in procuring. The Norsemen fought with brave determination, and as one after another of the Dane ships was cleared of men it was drawn off to the rear, and its place was occupied by yet another ship, whose warriors, fresh and eager, renewed the onset. The air was filled with flying arrows and flashing spears and waving swords. The Norsemen, indeed, were completely surrounded by their foemen. The Swedish king, believing that Olaf Triggvison must certainly have suffered terrible loss at the hands of the Danes, had the fullest hope that he would take very little time in turning the defeat of King Sweyn into a victory for himself. The son of Queen Sigrid stood still on his forecastle. The man who taught you the use of the sword might have been better employed, for in truth he has taught you very little. The earls men were fresh and vigorous; they had waited for hours for their chiefs orders to enter the fray, and now that those orders had been given to them they fought with hot fury, yelling their battle cries and cutting down their foemen with ponderous axe and keen edged sword. The advice is good, said Erik, and I will follow it. The Iron Ram, and other ships, to the number of fifteen, then closed in about the Serpent, and, as they advanced, the archers on their decks opened battle by shooting their arrows high in air, so that they fell into the midst of Olafs men in an unremitting shower.

 The good ship creaked in all her beams, but no great damage was done. The king then went into the foreroom, unlocked the high seat chest and took therefrom many bright and sharp swords which he carried out in his arms and put down among his men. The vikings were still cautious of Olafs champions. The king flung his weapon, taking good aim; but this spear missed its mark as the first had done. The number of his men had become woefully small, and yet, as he believed, Olaf Triggvison was still unwounded, undaunted, and as full of confident hope as he had ever shown himself to be. The other was assailed by arrows and spears, but instantly he turned over and held his shield above him. The sight of so many goodhumoured faces (especially the blacks), the taste of the tropical fruits, and above all the lights that began to shine in the town made a most charming contrast to our dark and bloody sojourn on the island; and the doctor and the squire, taking me along with them, went ashore to pass the early part of the night. The maroon had connived at his escape in a shore boat some hours ago, and he now assured us he had only done so to preserve our lives, which would certainly have been forfeit if that man with the one leg had stayed aboard. The seacook had not gone emptyhanded. I will not lie behind my men when the battle begins!

 Its not them I mind; its the roundshot. But Einar Eindridson kept his eyes upon the waves until at last, in the midst of a bright beam of sunlight far away he saw the shield of King Olaf appear, with its glistening image of the holy cross. She looked out upon the bay, and seeing the enormous hostile fleet that was closing in upon Olafs diminished force she burst into tears. While the King of Sweden and his forces were engaged with their attack upon Olafs centre of battle, Earl Erik adopted a plan which, although seemingly more hopeless, was in the end more successful than any that had yet been attempted by either the Danes or the Swedes.

 And then there came the sound of hurried feet upon the stairs, and Einar Eindridson rushed upon the upper deck, followed by three of his shipmates, and pursued by Earl Erik and a great crowd of clamouring vikings. Let that suffice. And as the weight increased so did the Serpent lean over, until at last her bulwarks were almost on a level with those of the Iron Ram. While the Danes were in full retreat the Swedes hastened forward to renew the attack. Its large toes protruded laterally as do those of the semiarboreal peoples of Borneo, the Philippines and other remote regions where low types still persist.

 He had cut through a bulkhead unobserved and had removed one of the sacks of coin, worth perhaps three or four hundred guineas, to help him on his further wanderings. She was a longship, of twenty banks of oars, and her crew were the pick of all the warmen of Denmark. I shouted loudly and waved my handkerchief. He looked down into the sea. he cried; and then he whispered in Olafs ear, and they both strode slowly aft to the rail. Then he was given a lodge to keep, exactly as he had feared upon the island; and he still lives, a great favourite, though something of a butt, with the country boys, and a notable singer in church on Sundays and saints days. It was just at sundown when we cast anchor in a most beautiful landlocked gulf, and were immediately surrounded by shore boats full of Negroes and Mexican Indians and halfbloods selling fruits and vegetables and offering to dive for bits of money. He pressed forward to the stairs; but Kolbiorn Stallare drew him back.

 Let none of the blood fall upon my hair! I searched round in the forest, but could see no tracks which could help me to a conclusion. He turned to see who had flung the javelin and saw King Olaf standing by the poop rail poising a second spear. Let them all be set free, ordered the earl. he cried. While Alexis was occupied in a war with Patzinaces, on the banks of the Danube, Zachas, a Saracen pirate, scoured the Archipelago, having, with the assistance of an able Smyrniote, constructed a flotilla of forty brigantines, and some light fastrowing boats, manned by adventurers like himself. It was amidships that the toughest fighting went on, and it was here that the larger number of the defenders met their death. He sent many of his best men on board, armed with axe and sword.

 Then Thorfinn caught sight of King Olaf, and at a sign from the king he lowered his blade and drew back a pace. He boarded her with a vast crowd of his vikings. He bade his rowers stop their rowing on the starboard side. And now the Long Serpent lay with only two companions, the Short Serpent at her starboard and the Crane at her larboard side. And I have been thinking, ever since this battle began that the great luck of Olaf may be due to that sign of the cross that we see on all his banners and shields. Then Thorstein Oxfoots sword was struck from his hand. While Kolbiorn and others of Olafs stem defenders kept up an incessant battle with their javelins and swords, King Olaf and his archers shot their arrows high in air so that they fell in thick rain upon the Danish decks. Let her prow and not her stern stand out. I did not know which way to turn or what I should do first.

 It is ill made and cumbrous, and a figure of the cross will take less room in our stem and bring us more luck withal. Then Olaf strode back to the lypting deck and once more surveyed the battle from on high. While the vikings were at this work a constant rain of arrows and javelins was showered upon them by King Olaf himself and his marksmen on the poop, and as Erik saw his best men falling he half repented having taken them from the fight. And it may be that in this he was right. He passed astern of the kings fleet. I have a vague recollection, as one remembers a bad dream, of rushing about through the woods all round the empty camp, calling wildly for my companions. It was not very long ere yet two others followed; and then the Short Serpent was exposed, even as her four companions had been.

 Let us not lose courage at the sight of these heathen devourers of horse flesh! And now the battle raged fiercely. He would have known Olaf Triggvison had a score of such men as Kolbiorn been at his side. He was, therefore, well able to judge that neither the king of the Danes nor the king of the Swedes was capable of overcoming so brave and mighty a warrior as the king of the Norsemen, or of wresting the Long Serpent from the man who had built her and who knew so well how to defend his own. Then at fullest speed he bore down upon the kings outermost dragon, crashed into her side and renewed his onslaught. It is for Christs faith that we fight today. Then he lashed two spars together, a long plank crossed with a shorter one, and raised this rough made crucifix high in the stem of the Iron Ram. And suddenly there came something to remind me of my absent companions. It is true that we had made a strict resolution against firing, but if it seemed to them that I might be in danger they would not hesitate. And then suddenly there came a crashI was falling through space, and everything beyond was darkness and rest. It was the body of a low type of man or a high type of beast.

 I rushed in. He had fought with his father in the great battle against Sigvaldi and the vikings of Jomsburg, and from what he had seen on that day of Olaf Triggvisons prowess, and from what he had since heard of Olafs warfare in England and other lands, he had made a very true estimate of the man who now fought in defence of the Long Serpent. And yet I shuddered at the position in which I found myself, and would have given all I possessed at that moment to have been honorably free of the whole business. Then Earl Erik backed out with the Iron Ram, while the seamen on his other ships cut away the lashings that had bound Olafs outermost vessel to her neighbour, and drew the conquered craft away into the rear, leaving the next ship exposed. He has taught me enough to enable me to slay such a man as you! he cried as he rallied his men.

 I quickened my pace into a run. Then it would catch it up again and come bounding swiftly along the path I had taken. It was a long slim blade he offeredone that I could carry between my teethand so I accepted it gladly. And then suddenly came the thought, Why not? Then he lumbered away and was lost among the boulders. He had already, from a distance, kept up an intermittent fire of arrows into the midst of the Norse ships, and it may be that he had thus helped to reduce King Olafs strength.

 He had made the attack with five and forty fully manned warships, and yet all this great force had been as nothing against the superior skill and courage of the defenders. It was smelling out my trail. And in the garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes, sufficient to stay my hunger. Then the king asked Sigurd what prize he had staked, and Sigurd answered:  The prize was staked many months ago when I met Klerkon over in Esthonia, and it was arranged that if the vikings horse should overcome mine he was to take the young thrall Ole. It was the stegosaurusthe very creature which Maple White had preserved in his sketchbook, and which had been the first object which arrested the attention of Challenger! And so it was done. Then Klerkons stallion took hold of the jawbone of Sleipner, and held on until it seemed that he would never yield his hold. I was weary and spent, so my progress was not so fast as I wished; but at last I came into regions which I knew. It was clear that the great volcanic outburst which had raised this strange plateau so many years ago had not yet entirely spent its forces. I paused and listened, but there was nothing more.

 Then Olaf snatched back his head sharply, and so it happened that the blow hit the man who had hold of his hair, and the axe took off both his hands. And Earl Erik ordered his men to set Olaf free from his tether. And a third: I shall at least die in good company; but first, let me tighten my belt. I turned away baffled. I could not say, for it resembled an ape no more than it did a man. And with that the forecastle captain sprang down on the gangway, and knocking men off into the waist in his impetuous rush, swung his battleaxe round his head and aimed a terrific blow at Osmund Hooknose. Then for a few minutes came a lull in the fight, and men could breathe for a space. And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to them at least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us. And as it is his invariable practice to secrete and bury his booty, and from the perilous life he leads, being often killed or captured, he can never revisit the spot again; immense sums remain buried in those places, and are irrecoverably lost. From this place also he could fire his arrows and fling his spears over the heads of his Norsemen.

 It was the shotgun, not the rifle, which I had taken! he cried as full three score of his bravest warriors followed close at his back. And at this the boy turned round and said more softly:  Well, Thorgils, for your pleasure will I do it, and not for the vikings praise. Now do I swear upon the hilt of my swordhe raised his sword hilt to his lipsthat if I win this battle and take the Long Serpent for my prize I will straightway allow myself to be christened.

 He laid an arrow on the string and turned it on Wolf, who cried:  Shoot another way, king, and not at me but at your foes, for what I win in the fight I win for Norway, and maybe you will find that you have not over many men before the evening comes. Then followed a battle of looks between them, but the captain soon knuckled under, put up his weapon, and resumed his seat, grumbling like a beaten dog. Then the boy caught his knives and thrust them one by one into his belt, and, turning shoreward, strode quickly down the plank and made his way through the cheering crowd, followed by Thorgils. It came about in this way. It filled me with indescribable terror to think how swiftly that desolating change had come. Then as the two gleaming weapons were well in play, rising and falling in quick succession, one of his hands went to his belt, and he drew yet a third knife and plied it in turn with the other two. Our effects were scattered in wild confusion over the ground; my comrades had disappeared, and close to the smouldering ashes of our fire the grass was stained crimson with a hideous pool of blood. I shied a small stone at him and bade him shut uphis uncanny noise made me nervous.

 It lasted for perhaps two seconds, to be followed by the screams and moans of the wounded, the cursing of the men and the hoarse commands of the ships officers. It struck us on the starboard side almost amidships. And the boys on the bank cried out, Well done, Rekoni! And he and Redruth backed with a great heave that sent her stern bodily under water. He called out loudly to Ketil the Tall:  Bring forward the large ship.

 It seemed that, like all the other vikings who had spoken so boldly at that feast, Vagn was to be cheated of his vow, yet he resolved to meet his death bravely. I attribute this to the fact of the smallness of the beach, the enormous depth of surrounding water and the great distance at which Caprona lies from her nearest neighbor. And as he swam to shore the vikings laughed aloud, and some who had thought of giving him a reward put back their gold into their wallets and turned away. But this was not all. And he thrust his thumbs into his belt and drew back. I remembered that Challenger had declared that man could not exist upon the plateau, since with his feeble weapons he could not hold his own against the monsters who roamed over it. Then the Norwegians pressed in a great throng against him, and he saw that further resistance was useless.

 He is the noblest champion who will fight against us today, said Olaf, and from him and the high born men that I see upon his decks we may expect a hard battle. I began to walk slowly round, therefore, feeling in every direction to find out what this strange place could be into which I had been so opportunely precipitated. It must have been a little after three oclock in the afternoon that it happenedthe afternoon of June 3rd, 1916. And all the while Sigurd Erikson kept his eyes upon the lads glowing, upturned face. It was only upon the third day that the ganglia ran down and the dreadful things were still. He had seen from the first that it would be his place to assume the defensive, and he had given the order for his ships to be drawn up in line, broadside to broadside. Then I gladly accept, said Olaf. I say hopped advisedly, for the beast moved like a kangaroo, springing along in an erect position upon its powerful hind legs, while its front ones were held bent in front of it. And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what ruthless and utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only upon animals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its inferior races. It contained much wonderful magic, and some astonishingly hard strokes, as they told it; but reading between their lines, the magic bears a strong resemblance to many spells cast even at this day, and as for the sword strokes, there was need for them to be hard in Norway then. Then it dived, and I saw it no more.

 It was at Para also that we engaged Gomez and Manuel, two halfbreeds from up the river, just come down with a cargo of redwood. It remained for the scout team to determine whether human beings would want to live on itwhether, in fact, they themselves would want to, because, if so, they had the option of becoming the first settlers. And now, sir, continued the doctor, since I now know theres such a fellow in my district, you may count Ill have an eye upon you day and night. Then it came back, to me. I stood like a man paralyzed, still staring at the ground which I had traversed.

 He was at my very heels. Then from out of the silence, imminent and threatening, there came once more that low, throaty croaking, far louder and closer than before. He was not personally afraid of Klerkon, neither did he believe that the viking would go to much trouble to secure his prize even if his horse should be successful. He offers it who has the powerEarl Erik himself, answered the earl. Then suddenly I saw it. And there to the south? It was August 2nd when we snapped our last link with the outer world by bidding farewell to the Esmeralda. He put Vagn Akison at the end of the log, intending to keep him to the last in order to increase his agony. I was plodding up the slope, turning these thoughts over in my mind, and had reached a point which may have been halfway to home, when my mind was brought back to my own position by a strange noise behind me. And then again, as the stir increased, and he could see the men beginning to troop on board the long ships,  This voyage shall be as the falling of snowflakes into the sea; but what man can escape his fate?

 I could testify that it was full of strange creatures, and I had seen several land forms of primeval life which we had not before encountered. It is for this reason that I am compelled to be vague in my narrative, and I would warn my readers that in any map or diagram which I may give the relation of places to each other may be correct, but the points of the compass are carefully confused, so that in no way can it be taken as an actual guide to the country. I had no time to examine it further for I had need to hurry if I were to be back in camp in the morning. And now Earl Hakon pulled up alongside the ship of Bui, and a combat ensued, which has scarcely had its equal in all the battles of the Northmen. It narrowed rapidly, however, and after two more days steaming we reached an Indian village, where the Professor insisted that we should land, and that the Esmeralda should be sent back to Manaos. and sprang into the sea. It floods the banks, extends in great lagoons over a monstrous waste of country, and forms a huge district, called locally the Gapo, which is for the most part too marshy for foottravel and too shallow for boating. and each answered in his own fashion. And brandishing his axe he rushed towards his enemy.

 He did not doubt that, because they were all that remained of the Jomsburgers, they were therefore the bravest and stoutest of all the vikings who had engaged in the great battle, and he feared that if they were allowed to live they would surely bring some great trouble upon him. It happened in the beginning of the summer that Sigurd Erikson journeyed north into Esthonia to gather the kings taxes and tribute. Then the king turned to his own ships. He was seized from behind, disarmed, and bound hand and foot with strong ropes. He took up two chests of gold, one in either arm, and mounting the gunwale of his ship, cried out: Overboard all folk of Bui!

 It seemed that the lad was of good station, for his clothing was of finely woven cloth, and there was a gold neckband to his kirtle, and his long black hair was well combed and curled. This final contest, while it lasted, was fierce and terrible. And over allsilence. Then Wolf the Red, his standard bearer, whose station was forward in the bow, mumbled a complaint:  If the Serpent shall lie as far forward as she is longer than your other ships, then there will be windy weather today in her bows. It would be supposed that his wild career would be one of delight. When he advanced upon the Serpent Olaf Triggvison was ready to meet him, refreshed by his brief rest, unwounded still, and with his warlike spirit burning eager within him. And now I was coming into my own.

 It is of no importance, for the purpose of giving jurisdiction in cases of piracy, on whom or where a piratical offence is committed. It was a bitter cold winter, with long, hard frosts and heavy gales; and it was plain from the first that my poor father was little likely to see the spring. And then suddenly, with a crashing and a rending, a thudding of giant feet and a panting of monster lungs the beast was upon me once more. And his heathen Sweden, I think, would find it more agreeable to sit at the fireside and lick their sacrificial bowls than to board the Long Serpent under the rain of our weapons. And it is evident, that notwithstanding these follies wasted the population of Europe, squandered its treasures, and infected us with new vices and diseases, still the crusades diminished the bondage of the feudal system, by augmenting the power of the King, and the strength of the Commons; while they also occasioned a very increased activity in commerce: thus taming the ferocity of mens spirits, increasing agriculture in value from the safety it enjoyed, and establishing a base for permanent prosperity.

 He was tall and powerfully framed, and bore his years and the white volume of his beard in an altogether stately fashion; but his eyes were most indelible, pale blue and singularly cold in repose, very bright and keen and searching when his face was animated. he would cry, pointing to the north. And he cut his way through the crowd of Danes, who, led by Sweyn himself, had been making a final rally and preparing to board the Serpent. And now it must be told how Earl Erik Hakonson fared in that fight. And now ensued one of the sharpest combats that had been seen that day. And when the word went round that the rescued man was Kolbiorn Stallare and not the king, the lad pointed outward upon the sea and all looked in amaze upon the shining crucifix as it rose and fell with the motion of the waves. He would tell the history of the mighty river so rapidly explored (for some of the first conquerors of Peru actually crossed the entire continent upon its waters), and yet so unknown in regard to all that lay behind its everchanging banks. I crouched low among the bushes, for I knew from past experience that with a single cry the creature could bring a hundred of its loathsome mates about my ears. He could not speak of that great country without ardor, and this ardor was infectious, for, ignorant as I was, he fixed my attention and stimulated my curiosity. I passed close to the pterodactyl swamp, and as I did so, with a dry, crisp, leathery rattle of wings, one of these great creaturesit was twenty feet at least from tip to tiprose up from somewhere near me and soared into the air. He then formally declared war against Pedro Lopez, the leader of the slavedrivers, enrolled a band of runaway slaves in his service, armed them, and conducted a campaign, which ended by his killing with his own hands the notorious halfbreed and breaking down the system which he represented.

 I could notmust notfail. It was one January morning, very earlya pinching, frosty morningthe cove all grey with hoarfrost, the ripple lapping softly on the stones, the sun still low and only touching the hilltops and shining far to seaward. It may be that they cannot, but it may also be that they will not, help us to get away. He has been gone about three days; but the most startling thing I have on record is that von Schoenvorts and Olson while out hunting the other day discovered oil about fifteen miles north of us beyond the sandstone cliffs.

 It was a rude, raw, primeval version of the Jews in Babylon or the Israelites in Egypt. He took Sinclair, Brady, James, and Tippet with him. He was not sailorly, and yet he had a smack of the sea about him too. It was on the third day after our forming our camp near the Indian caves that the tragedy occurred. He was a pale, tallowy creature, wanting two fingers of the left hand, and though he wore a cutlass, he did not look much like a fighter. It seems incredible that all that I have passed throughall those weird and terrifying experiencesshould have been encompassed within so short a span as three brief months.

 I stopped, and, picking a cartridge from my pocket, I opened the breech of my gun. It seemed now that the few Jomsvikings who were left would have the glory of victory all to themselves. I thought of the despairing yell of the tortured iguanodonthat dreadful cry which had echoed through the woods. He sank daily, and my mother and I had all the inn upon our hands, and were kept busy enough without paying much regard to our unpleasant guest. It was dreadful in the forest. It was a cheery companion, gurgling and chuckling as it ran, like the dear old troutstream in the West Country where I have fished at night in my boyhood. He has a gentle voice and a quiet manner, but behind his twinkling blue eyes there lurks a capacity for furious wrath and implacable resolution, the more dangerous because they are held in leash. He added privately that we were now approaching the door of the unknown country, and that the fewer whom we took into our confidence the better it would be.

 It was not until it had settled again that I dared to steal onwards upon my journey. It was like a boiling kettle or the bubbling of some great pot. I simply could not slink back with nothing done. I may have said somewhere in this chronicle that I am too imaginative to be a really courageous man, but that I have an overpowering fear of seeming afraid. 2  Black Dog Appears and Disappears   IT was not very long after this that there occurred the first of the mysterious events that rid us at last of the captain, though not, as you will see, of his affairs. It was a fearsome walk, and one which will be with me so long as memory holds.

 It was wonderful, and yet it must surely be. He has fruits delicious to taste, and as companions, the unsophisticated daughters of Africa and the Indies. He stood with his bare feet firmly gripping the plank, and his head thrown back, and his lithe, well balanced body swaying in regular movement with his arms. I seemed to hear her voice as she said it. It was out of the question for the moment, and yet surely we could not leave the plateau until we had some definite knowledge upon the point. It was shallow, for in many places I saw low sandbanks protruding above the water. It was something between a snore and a growl, low, deep, and exceedingly menacing.

 It was of enormous size and power, like an erect elephant, but its movements, in spite of its bulk, were exceedingly alert. He ran his fingers over his short yellow hair, and then, turning with his back to the sun, flung one of his knives high up into the air. Both were agreed that the monsters were practically brainless, that there was no room for reason in their tiny cranial cavities, and that if they have disappeared from the rest of the world it was assuredly on account of their own stupidity, which made it impossible for them to adapt themselves to changing conditions. It was, as I have said, a pit, with sharplysloping walls and a level bottom about twenty feet across. He was fair of skin, and by this Sigurd knew that he was not an Esthonian.

 It was so high that I could not reach the top of it with my hand, and it appeared to be covered with grease. I warmed at the thought. It was a trapmade by the hand of man. I encountered a couple of hungrylooking dogs, but both hurried circuitously away from the advances I made them. I rested for the remainder of the daylight in a shrubbery, being, in my enfeebled condition, too fatigued to push on.

 I rose, also, and over the ships side, I saw not two hundred yards distant the periscope of a submarine, while racing toward the liner the wake of a torpedo was distinctly visible. I shall never forget the ashy faces of the passengers as they stampeded for their lifebelts, though there was no panic. It was now broad daylight. It was for me now to hurry on as fast as possible, and so to reassure them.

 It is true that there was that one hideous pool of blood, which told of violence. He rode across the marketplace and there alighted from his horse, and turned his eyes towards the sea. That formidable seafaring man with one leg has at last gone clean out of my life; but I dare say he met his old Negress, and perhaps still lives in comfort with her and Captain Flint. It happened to the Swedes, as to the Danes, that notwithstanding their superior numbers they found that they were ill matched in skill and prowess with the Norsemen. He was a very handsome man, tall and strong, with long fair hair and clear blue eyes. Suddenly a thought came to me and brought some little comfort to my heart. It struck the crest of Eriks helmet, but did no harm. He strode nearer to them, and heard the hoarse voices of the vikings calling out in loud praise of a feat that had been performed by someone in their midst. It must be Gods will that he now shall rule in Norway; and that is not strange, for I see that he has changed the stem dweller on the Iron Ram.

 I am, or was, junior member of my fathers firm. He was a tall, red bearded man, whose nose was flat against his scarred, bronzed face. His helmet was battered by the many spears and swords that had struck upon it, and his shield bristled with broken arrows. I rescued it, but I was soaked above the knees doing it; and then I sat down in the sand and opened it, and in the long twilight read the manuscript, neatly written and tightly folded, which was its contents. I will take peace gladly if it be that all my comrades have it also, answered the viking. I had thought you were of Norway, Erik said, and if that be so it were not well that you should die.

 I should not be a worthy Jomsviking if I were afraid of death, said one; and then Thorkel dealt him the blow. I had come to Greenland for the summer, on the advice of my physician, and was slowly being bored to extinction, as I had thoughtlessly neglected to bring sufficient readingmatter. He doubtless here refers to the waters of the ocean on the sea coast, and not in creeks and inlets. Christian against pagan! I am here and here must remain. he asked of the tall youth at his side. I will tell also of the huge bird which chased Challenger to the shelter of the rocks one daya great running bird, far taller than an ostrich, with a vulturelike neck and cruel head which made it a walking death. It is to be hoped so, I suppose, for his chances of comfort in another world are very small. He is better equipped for a rough expedition of this sort than one would imagine at first sight.

 He spends his days flitting through the woods with his shotgun and his butterflynet, and his evenings in mounting the many specimens he has acquired. He has been upon several scientific expeditions in his youth (he was with Robertson in Papua), and the life of the camp and the canoe is nothing fresh to him. I had to smile as I read Bradleys report. It is the king! I paused where I was, with my napkin in my hand.

 I followed him in, and I remember observing the contrast the neat, bright doctor, with his powder as white as snow and his bright, black eyes and pleasant manners, made with the coltish country folk, and above all, with that filthy, heavy, bleared scarecrow of a pirate of ours, sitting, far gone in rum, with his arms on the table. I had regarded his presence as an encumbrance to the expedition, but, as a matter of fact, I am now well convinced that his power of endurance is as great as my own. He is twenty years younger, but has something of the same spare, scraggy physique. I speak freely, and I leave the use of my material to your own discretion, Mr. He is exceedingly neat and prim in his ways, dresses always with great care in white drill suits and high brown mosquitoboots, and shaves at least once a day. I will also allude very briefly to our river journey, up a wide, slowmoving, claytinted stream, in a steamer which was little smaller than that which had carried us across the Atlantic. I had but wished to see you succeed where your masters son has failed, sighed the elder lad. When the men had finished lashing the ships together he again took his war horn and blew a loud blast upon it that echoed and reechoed along the rocky shores of the island. I understand that they are the very twoAtaca and Ipetu by namewho accompanied Professor Challenger upon his previous journey. He spoke little of his own exploits in Brazil and Peru, but it was a revelation to me to find the excitement which was caused by his presence among the riverine natives, who looked upon him as their champion and protector.

 He was only once crossed, and that was towards the end, when my poor father was far gone in a decline that took him off. He sprang to his feet, drew and opened a sailors claspknife, and balancing it open on the palm of his hand, threatened to pin the doctor to the wall. He spoke to him as before, over his shoulder and in the same tone of voice, rather high, so that all the room might hear, but perfectly calm and steady: If you do not put that knife this instant in your pocket, I promise, upon my honour, you shall hang at the next assizes. He expects to be gone several weeks and to follow along their base in search of a point where they may be scaled.

 I have, according to our arrangement, addressed it to you, my dear Mr. He could see some bringing weapons and provisions down to the shore, and others busily lading the ships. He did not flinch, but tried to pass off his injury with a jest. I will not bore those whom this narrative may reach by an account of our luxurious voyage upon the Booth liner, nor will I tell of our weeks stay at Para (save that I should wish to acknowledge the great kindness of the Pereira da Pinta Company in helping us to get together our equipment). I remember his breath hanging like smoke in his wake as he strode off, and the last sound I heard of him as he turned the big rock was a loud snort of indignation, as though his mind was still running upon Dr. He remained on board until nightfall, and then, dropping into a small sailing boat that he had been careful to provide himself with, he stole out of the bay and was soon far away among the skerries, safe from all pursuit. He was an Indian.

 he asked of Bersi the Strong, one of his chieftains who stood near him. He then retook London, embellished it, equipped fleets, restrained the Danes in England, and prevented others from landing. I had always my eye open for seafaring men, with one leg or two, and I remember this one puzzled me. He fled for safety to the Scandinavian island of Soderoe, where finding many outlaws and discontented fugitives, he addressed their passions, and succeeded in placing himself at their head. He assailed each ship as it approached with showers of well directed arrows. He now rowed proudly upon the left wing of the Norse fleet. I asked him what was for his service, and he said he would take rum; but as I was going out of the room to fetch it, he sat down upon a table and motioned me to draw near.

 I took a step nearer. He thought that he had made an end of the King of Sweden. I can scarce believe the truth of it. I have said before that Lord John Roxton was a South Americomaniac. He had won no fame by his daring attack, but only ignominious defeat, and he was fain to escape alive, albeit very badly wounded. He had also seen Sweyn Forkbeard in the thick of battle, and Olaf of Sweden no less. I ask you to picture the shaded sittingroom of the Fazenda St. I write this from day to day, but I trust that before I come to the end of it, I may be able to say that the light shines, at last, through our clouds.

 I shall have tales of a merry fight to tell to Odin tonight. I go before, he said, and fell on the deck with a clatter of steel. He had a firm belief that the men of Norway were braver and bolder, stronger in body, more skilful in the use of their weapons, and had greater powers of endurance than any of their neighbours. He at least saw cause for thinking that the only men who could succeed in vanquishing King Olafs Norsemen were the Norsemen of Earl Erik Hakonson. I will tell, too, of the great nocturnal white thingto this day we do not know whether it was beast or reptilewhich lived in a vile swamp to the east of the lake, and flitted about with a faint phosphorescent glimmer in the darkness.

 I can only say that it seemed to be larger than a cow and had the strangest musky odor. I was carried ashore, and while the evening meal was being prepared, I wandered to and fro along the rocky, shattered shore. He saw that while the Long Serpent continued to be supported on either side by five strong and well manned dragonships she was practically unassailable. I know a sub as a mother knows her babys face, and have commanded a score of them on their trial runs. I graduated under Curtiss, and after a long siege with my father obtained his permission to try for the Lafayette Escadrille. He knew how much depended upon his preventing Erik from boarding the kings ship. I was sitting on deck with some of the fellows who were going into the American ambulance service with me, my Airedale, Crown Prince Nobbler, asleep at my feet, when the first blast of the whistle shattered the peace and security of the ship. He was himself unwounded still, but his silken tunic was tattered, so that the links of his coat of mail showed through. He saw that his stem defenders were quickly becoming fewer and fewer, and that those who yet remained wielded their weapons with slow and heavy strokes. He saw that his stem defenders, to whom he had served new weapons, had now become so furious that they leapt upon the gunwales in order to reach their foes with their swords and kill them.