#Chapter 3: Aliens



 Yet though they wore no clothing, it was in the other  artificial additions to their bodily resources that their great  superiority over man lay. And please close the  door gently when you go inside. And he did, but he wished it didnt have to continue in quite that way. And still he didnt have her full attention.

 And for you, Phyllis. And there wont be any snow oror anything. And I think your species must be an adaptable one, too; you just havent  really tried. and  perhaps a trace of spite toward his wife? And Im quite sure she thinks of you  as a tree who happens to look like a human being. And dont underestimate  Magnolias capabilities. And I  suppose he laughed modestlybecause Im such a good teacher. And she  burst into tears again. And even when there is fruit, so much of it tends to be  parthenocarpousno seeds. And how do you think  I felt when a tree answered me back? And I  know youll like Phyllis when you get to know her.

 And there, amazed and afraid, even as I stood amazed and afraid,  were my cousin and my wifemy wife white and tearless. And then a strange thing occurred. And then I forget. And as I looked at this wide expanse of houses and factories and  churches, silent and abandoned; as I thought of the multitudinous  hopes and efforts, the innumerable hosts of lives that had gone to  build this human reef, and of the swift and ruthless destruction that  had hung over it all; when I realised that the shadow had been rolled  back, and that men might still live in the streets, and this dear vast  dead city of mine be once more alive and powerful, I felt a wave of  emotion that was near akin to tears. And scattered  about it, some in their overturned warmachines, some in the now rigid  handlingmachines, and a dozen of them stark and silent and laid in a  row, were the Martiansdead! And I  would save myself even the trouble of killing myself. And as I  emerged from the top of Baker Street, I saw far away over the trees in  the clearness of the sunset the hood of the Martian giant from which  this howling proceeded. And pursuant to this idea of a holiday, he insisted upon playing  cards after we had eaten. And I noted that now there was no  question that he personally was to capture and fight the great  machine.

 And the great thing is, we must  leave the Martians alone. And we may even be able to keep a watch, and run about in the  open when the Martians keep away. And in all those places we shall gather. And they cant be  happy. And the railway tunnels and subways.

 and subsided into a grim meditation. And I succumbed to his conviction. And some, maybe, they will train to  hunt us. And the bar loafers, and  mashers, and singersI can imagine them. And suddenly I  gripped his hand. And I dont mean to be caught either, and  tamed and fattened and bred like a thundering ox. And if Im not mistaken,  youll show what insides youve got, too, before long. And  thats the principle I acted upon.

 And I saw one, one day, out by Wandsworth,  picking houses to pieces and routing among the wreckage. And even if theres a delay, how can it  alter the end? And theyve  made their footing good and crippled the greatest power in the world. And the  night before lasthe stopped and spoke impressivelyit was just a  matter of lights, but it was something up in the air. And after they went away I got off towards  Walton across the fields. And you werent killed  at Weybridge?

 And presently, turning suddenly, with an  odd feeling of being watched, I beheld something crouching amid a  clump of bushes. And I set this down as I  have set all this story down, as it was. And in the  garden beyond Roehampton I got a quantity of immature potatoes,  sufficient to stay my hunger. And oh! and seemed to go  out of the cellar again.

 And that was all. And after that I abandoned altogether the idea  of escaping by excavation. And  then began a shrieking and a sustained and cheerful hooting from the  Martians. And suddenly I heard  a yell, and saw a long tentacle reaching over the shoulder of the  machine to the little cage that hunched upon its back. And I recall now with a sort of wonder that, in spite of the infinite  danger in which we were between starvation and a still more terrible  death, we could yet struggle bitterly for that horrible privilege of  sight. And while upon this matter of detail, it is  remarkable that the long leverages of their machines are in most cases  actuated by a sort of sham musculature of the disks in an elastic  sheath; these disks become polarised and drawn closely and powerfully  together when traversed by a current of electricity. And not only did the Martians either not know of  (which is incredible), or abstain from, the wheel, but in their  apparatus singularly little use is made of the fixed pivot or  relatively fixed pivot, with circular motions thereabout confined  to one plane.

 And I have been convinced of this in spite of strong preconceptions. And afterwards I found it broadcast throughout  the country, and especially wherever there was a stream of water. And then  they yelled again. And then a swift movement of the steamboat (she  had suddenly come round to avoid being run down) flung him headlong  from the seat upon which he was standing. And beyond, over the blue hills that rise southward of the river,  the glittering Martians went to and fro, calmly and methodically  spreading their poison cloud over this patch of country and then over  that, laying it again with their steam jets when it had served its  purpose, and taking possession of the conquered country. And in the evening many people came  hurrying along the road nearby their stopping place, fleeing from  unknown dangers before them, and going in the direction from which my  brother had come. And farther on, from a lull near East Barnet, they saw  two trains running slowly one after the other without signal or  ordertrains swarming with people, with men even among the coals  behind the enginesgoing northward along the Great Northern Railway. And as the day advanced and the engine drivers and stokers refused  to return to London, the pressure of the flight drove the people in an  everthickening multitude away from the stations and along the  northwardrunning roads. And through this two Martians slowly  waded, and turned their hissing steam jets this way and that.

 And  where it came upon water some chemical action occurred, and the  surface would be instantly covered with a powdery scum that sank  slowly and made way for more. And the touch of that vapour, the inhaling of  its pungent wisps, was death to all that breathes. And there had been no crash, no answering explosion. And from this paper my brother read that catastrophic dispatch of  the CommanderinChief:    The Martians are able to discharge enormous clouds of a black and  poisonous vapour by means of rockets. And all about himin the rooms below, in the houses on each side  and across the road, and behind in the Park Terraces and in the  hundred other streets of that part of Marylebone, and the Westbourne  Park district and St. And even as I spoke he sprang to his feet and stopped me by a  gesture. And  suddenlyfire, earthquake, death! And while the Martians behind me were thus preparing for their next  sally, and in front of me Humanity gathered for the battle, I made my  way with infinite pains and labour from the fire and smoke of burning  Weybridge towards London. And then, very slowly, I realised that by a miracle  I had escaped. And shining with the growing light of the east, three of the metallic  giants stood about the pit, their cowls rotating as though they were  surveying the desolation they had made.

 And the smellgood  God! And this was the little world in which I had been living securely  for years, this fiery chaos! And I was galloping hard  to meet it! And this Thing I saw!

 And very faint now, but very distinct  through the hot, quiet air, one heard the whirr of a machinegun that  was presently stilled, and an intermittent cracking of rifles. And that behind me! And then, with a renewed  horror, I saw a round, black object bobbing up and down on the edge of  the pit. No matter how much youwell,  pursue me, I can never turn into a laurel tree. And invisible to me because it was so remote and small,  flying swiftly and steadily towards me across that incredible  distance, drawing nearer every minute by so many thousands of miles,  came the Thing they were sending us, the Thing that was to bring so  much struggle and calamity and death to the earth. The  creatures mindless!

 And before we judge of them too harshly we must remember what  ruthless and utter destruction our own species has wrought, not only  upon animals, such as the vanished bison and the dodo, but upon its  inferior races. It was unreasonable. And we men, the creatures who inhabit this earth, must be to them  at least as alien and lowly as are the monkeys and lemurs to us. What he wanted to say, he had no right to  say, so he kept silent. And how are all things made for man?

 CHAPTER SEVEN    THE MAN ON PUTNEY HILL      I spent that night in the inn that stands at the top of Putney  Hill, sleeping in a made bed for the first time since my flight to  Leatherhead. And  early in the twentieth century came the great disillusionment. I thought IdI wanted to have a word with  Magnolia. And looking across space with  instruments, and intelligences such as we have scarcely dreamed of,  they see, at its nearest distance only 35,000,000 of miles sunward of  them, a morning star of hope, our own warmer planet, green with  vegetation and grey with water, with a cloudy atmosphere eloquent of  fertility, with glimpses through its drifting cloud wisps of broad  stretches of populous country and narrow, navycrowded seas. I hope he grows up to  make you a good husband.

 And then he perceived that, very slowly, the circular top of the  cylinder was rotating on its body. People were watching for Martians here from the church towers. And theres something inside. he  called. And then, within thirty yards  of the pit, advancing from the direction of Horsell, I noted a little  black knot of men, the foremost of whom was waving a white flag. copyright on this publication was renewed. And far away  towards Knaphill I saw the flashes of trees and hedges and wooden  buildings suddenly set alight. I had  almost forgotten she was only a tree. And Ill bring it back by midnight, I said. And in an instant it was gone.

 and in another minute it was with its  companion, half a mile away, stooping over something in the field. and leaving him to  digest that if he could, I hurried on after the artilleryman. And meanwhile the military and naval authorities, now  fully alive to the tremendous power of their antagonists, worked with  furious energy. And through the charred and desolated areaperhaps twenty  square miles altogetherthat encircled the Martian encampment on  Horsell Common, through charred and ruined villages among the green  trees, through the blackened and smoking arcades that had been but a  day ago pine spinneys, crawled the devoted scouts with the heliographs  that were presently to warn the gunners of the Martian approach.

 And the  mightier they are the more sane and wary should we be. and so forth. And one at least was disposed  ofperhaps more. And so, with  reiterated assurances of the safety of London and the ability of the  authorities to cope with the difficulty, this quasiproclamation  closed.

 and hurried to the next door. And presently men selling unnaturally early newspapers  came bawling into the street:    London in danger of suffocation! And overhead the dawn was growing brighter, clear and steady and calm. And in the back of my mind was the sense of all  the huge unknown and hidden forces Londonward. And then the Martian beside  us raised his tube on high and discharged it, gunwise, with a heavy  report that made the ground heave.

 And then night and extinctionnothing but  a silent mass of impenetrable vapour hiding its dead. And as they advanced towards Barnet a  tumultuous murmuring grew stronger. And amid the various  cries one heard disputes, reproaches, groans of weariness and fatigue;  the voices of most of them were hoarse and weak. And the child suddenly darted away from my brother,  crying Mother! And this was no disciplined march; it was a  stampedea stampede gigantic and terriblewithout order and without  a goal, six million people unarmed and unprovisioned, driving  headlong. And all this time the boat was  paddling steadily out to sea and away from the fight; and when at last  the confusion cleared, the drifting bank of black vapour intervened,  and nothing of the Thunder Child could be made out, nor could the  third Martian be seen. And as it flew  it rained down darkness upon the land. And all being quiet throughout the afternoon, we  started about five oclock, as I should judge, along the blackened  road to Sunbury. And then followed such  a concussion as I have never heard before or since.

 And then the light  filtered in, not through the window, which remained black, but through  a triangular aperture between a beam and a heap of broken bricks in  the wall behind us. And this was the sum of the Martian organs. And while I am engaged in this description, I may add in this place  certain further details which, although they were not all evident to  us at the time, will enable the reader who is unacquainted with them  to form a clearer picture of these offensive creatures. And speaking of  the differences between the life on Mars and terrestrial life, I may  allude here to the curious suggestions of the red weed. And I assert that I  watched them closely time after time, and that I have seen four, five,  and (once) six of them sluggishly performing the most elaborately  complicated operations together without either sound or gesture. And of their  appliances, perhaps nothing is more wonderful to a man than the  curious fact that what is the dominant feature of almost all human  devices in mechanism is absentthe wheel is absent; among all the  things they brought to earth there is no trace or suggestion of their  use of wheels. And  in this connection it is curious to remark that even on this earth  Nature has never hit upon the wheel, or has preferred other expedients  to its development. And I would sit in the  darkness unable to keep my mind off him by reason of his  importunities. And while within we fought out our dark, dim contest of whispers,  snatched food and drink, and gripping hands and blows, without, in the  pitiless sunlight of that terrible June, was the strange wonder, the  unfamiliar routine of the Martians in the pit. And then, amid the clangour of  the machinery, came a drifting suspicion of human voices, that I  entertained at first only to dismiss.

 And I should have had to do all the digging myself. And so our widened incompatibility ended at last in open conflict. And over allsilence. And when, by an effort, I had set aside that picture of a prostrate  body, I faced the problem of the Martians and the fate of my wife. And suddenly that night became  terrible. And  besides  He looked at me. And these are only pioneers. And what will they do with us? And its the man that keeps on thinking comes  through.

 And  losing our heads, and rushing off in crowds to where there wasnt any  more safety than where we were. And instead of our rushing about blind,  on the howl, or getting dynamite on the chance of busting them up,  weve got to fix ourselves up according to the new state of affairs. And weve got to live and keep  independent while we learn. And on Sundaysfear of the  hereafter. And those of a less simple sort will work in a bit ofwhat is  it? And we form a bandablebodied, cleanminded men.

 And swish,  bang, rattle, swish! And just as I was beginning to face these things, the  artilleryman stopped digging, and looked at me. And as the day came  they became aware of a fightingmachine standing near by the Langham  and looking down at them. And for  the food!

 And just outside the terminus the train jolted over  temporary rails, and on either side of the railway the houses were  blackened ruins. And strange, too, it is to stand on Primrose Hill,  as I did but a day before writing this last chapter, to see the great  province of houses, dim and blue through the haze of the smoke and  mist, vanishing at last into the vague lower sky, to see the people  walking to and fro among the flower beds on the hill, to see the  sightseers about the Martian machine that stands there still, to hear  the tumult of playing children, and to recall the time when I saw it  all bright and clearcut, hard and silent, under the dawn of that last  great day. And strangest of all is it to hold my wifes hand again, and to think  that I have counted her, and that she has counted me, among the dead. And now Phyllis, for whom he had performed all this labor of love, for  whom he had waited five long monthsthe tedium of which had been broken  only by the intellectual pleasure of teaching English to a sympathetic  native neighborPhyllis seemed unappreciative. And this our life,  exempt from public haunt, finds tongues in trees, books in the running  brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything. And if your  coming to this planet has served only to add poetry to our cultural  heritage, it would be reason enough to welcome you with open limbs.

 And such a charming tune to go with it, too, Magnolia went on. And plants are just  vegetables. And he, he had often thought  secretly, was a different kind of man. And  Ive baked cookies, too, and whipped up a batch of penuche.

 And for you, too, he said courteously  to Magnolia. And the right two. and it was very, very sweet of you, dear. And that it is only a little  Christmas holly plant thats probably going to die, anywaythey almost  always do. And I hope he doesnt die. and her friend. And if he turns  blue, who knows what other changes might be brought about? The coffees already on and the canapes made, Phyllis smiled. It must have been awful for you, seeing me like this,  practically crowing over you, and knowing that you yourself would never  have the chance to be a mmmmother. It wont stay green, Magnolia observed.

 It must be hard when one has no intellectual  resources upon which to draw. I want you to have him. The door slammed behind his weeping wife. He wondered where he and Phyllis could put  them all, but some could sleep outside, if need be, for it was never  cold on Elysium. I  didnt realize. Its a boy, Magnolia announced, after a minute. Then why did you take your hat off when you were introduced to Miss  Magnolia, Cutler?

 Its so very thoughtful of you,  Doctor, but Im sure Jim would never give me anything that would injure  me. He hadnt much time to be sociable those days, for  there was such a lot of work to be done, so many preparations to be  made, so many things to be requisitioned from Earth. It was tears. Then why, where the natives are trees, shouldnt  I study botany? I like that and was going to go  on when she obviously recollected that they had company, and stopped. While I was still watching their sluggish motions in the sunlight,  and noting each strange detail of their form, the curate reminded me  of his presence by pulling violently at my arm. While the rest of the  body dwindled, the hands would grow larger. I told you, Miz Phyllis, maamhe may know the first thing about  botany, but he doesnt know anything after that. Then I returned through the pine wood, neckhigh with red weed here  and there, to find the landlord of the Spotted Dog had already found  burial, and so came home past the College Arms. Let us take a rest and gather strength  while we may. She was laughinga little  bitterly.

 He kicked at one of the pebbles. Let us  knock off a bit he said. Then suddenly a change, the passing of  somethingI knew not whatand then a stillness that could be felt. The tree had only been trying to cheer him up as any  friend might reasonably do. I guess this Christmas is  too early, but next Christmas there ought to be berries. Let us crawl under those bushes and talk. Its impossible to  synthesize chlorophyll from the light rays given off by our sunonly  cyanophyll. He had remembered Phyllis as  beautifuland she was beautiful.

 She looked toward James, but he turned his glance  away. She gave back  the pot reluctantly. I hope you do. Then he would suddenly revert to the matter of the food I withheld  from him, praying, begging, weeping, at last threatening. It  was almost like being back at the faculty club.

 The base camp,  where the bachelors and the older married couples lived, was located a  good distance away from his land, for he had raised his honeymoon  cottage far from the rest; he had wanted to have his Phyllis all to  himself. I dont believe anyone  ever gave me a present before. It didnt really hurt. She kissed his cheek. I know I should wait  until tomorrow, but I want to give the girls their presents now. Let me return to those  first new experiences of mine. Let us go back!

 Let it suffice to say, blood obtained from  a still living animal, in most cases from a human being, was run  directly by means of a little pipette into the recipient canal. Then I heard quite distinctly a booming exactly  like the sound of great guns. Then things  came to me slowly. While I was occupied in this way, one of the dismounted hussars came  running up. She and  Dr. He wrested the axe from her grip. Its so  deeply cognizant of the really meaningful things in life. Then  with a violent thud, a blinding flash, her decks, her funnels, leaped  upward. While I was still doubtful, it rapped smartly against the cellar  door and closed it. Then my brothers attention was distracted by a bearded, eaglefaced  man lugging a small handbag, which split even as my brothers  eyes rested on it and disgorged a mass of sovereigns that seemed to  break up into separate coins as it struck the ground.

 I do wish I could see  myself. She embraced him and the pot simultaneously. Then a dirty woman, carrying a heavy  bundle and weeping. It was almost true. He laughed. he asked. It would have been silly for her to pretend not to have overheard, since  the two were still standing almost directly underneath her. Then round the corner of the lane,  from between the villas that guarded it at its confluence with the  high road, came a little cart drawn by a sweating black pony and  driven by a sallow youth in a bowler hat, grey with dust. The plants here synthesize  cyanophyll instead of chlorophyll; thats why the leaves are blue  instead of green.

 She was in his arms at last; he was about to kiss her, and the tree  seemed very remote, when she drew back. She spoke, she read, she was  capable of conscious turgor movements. He made a wide curve to avoid me, as though he feared  I might prove a fresh competitor. She cant move from where she is, because shes rooted to the ground,  but shes capable of turgor movements, like certain Terrestrial forms of  vegetationfor example, the sensitive plant or blue grass. It was populated by an  intelligent race which had developed its culture to the limit of its  physical abilitiesactually well beyond the limit of what the astounded  Terrestrials could have conceived its physical abilities to bethen,  owing to unavoidable disaster, had started to die out. Its cruel and unfair to keep an  intelligentloosely speakinglifeform anywhere against her will,  dont you think?

 She stabbed her needle energetically through the tablecloth  she was embroidering. It remained for the scout team to determine whether human beings would  want to live on itwhether, in fact, they themselves would want to,  because, if so, they had the option of becoming the first settlers. Its that the male trees produce so little  pollen. It may be that  in the larger design of the universe this invasion from Mars is not  without its ultimate benefit for men; it has robbed us of that serene  confidence in the future which is the most fruitful source of  decadence, the gifts to human science it has brought are enormous, and  it has done much to promote the conception of the commonweal of  mankind. Then he jumped out of bed and ran to the window. Then it was, and then only, that he realised something of the full  power and terror of these monsters. She must be telepathic. Its beautiful.

 I dont suppose Ill need to turn on the landing lights, he said to  Magnolia. I hope they bring some pickles along. I think Dr. The entire race is dying out. She pushed him away. Then the  St. It seems to me that they have lost a vast advantage in the  failure of their first surprise. The only thing I didnt  suspect was that she was a tree! It seems to me that it should be possible to  define the position of the gun from which the shots are discharged, to  keep a sustained watch upon this part of the planet, and to anticipate  the arrival of the next attack. I  just stopped for a chat with Magnolia.

 she asked suspiciously. I am, dear. Its a possible thing? I understand. He appeared to be standing and yelling, for no reason that  I could discover. She wasnt so very polite to me! He was as black as a sweep with the black dust,  alive, but helplessly and speechlessly drunk. Then everything was still.

 Then I saw them dimly, colossal figures of grey, magnified  by the mist. I  sense a tropism that seems to incline me toward you. Then a hoarse  murmur and a movement of feeta splashing from the water. I know its a great honor. She was a big girl, radiantly  healthy, even though a little green at the moment. Its all over, he said. She had hardly looked at  the inside of the cottage, when he had shown her through, and now was  staring at the outside in a blank sort of way.

 Its like a great city, and in the glare  you can just see them moving. Then  we crept out of the house, and ran as quickly as we could down the  illmade road by which I had come overnight. She brushed back the long,  light brown hair which had got tumbled when she fainted. The preliminary exploration team had established the fact that the  planet was more or less Earthtype, that its air was breathable, its  temperature agreeably springlike, its mineral composition very similar  to Earths, with only slight traces of unknown elements, that there was  plenty of drinkable water and no threatening lifeforms. The bluereally bluegrass, blueviolet shrubbery and,  loveliest of all, the great golden tree with sapphire leaves and pale  pink blossoms, instead of looking alien, resembled nothing so much as a  fairytale version of Earth. Its perfectly true, I said. He was still optimistic, but it was a  less kinetic, a more thoughtful optimism. She seemed asleep, but she was dead. She was alive still; the steering gear, it seems, was intact and  her engines working. She was steaming at such a pace that in a minute she seemed halfway  between the steamboat and the Martiansa diminishing black bulk  against the receding horizontal expanse of the Essex coast. He talked so eloquently  of the possibility of capturing a fightingmachine that I more than  half believed in him again.

 He came down the road  towards them, and picked up nearly a hundred too drunk or frightened  to run away. Then the Thing shut off the  HeatRay, and turning its back upon the artilleryman, began to waddle  away towards the smouldering pine woods that sheltered the second  cylinder. Then the monster had risen to its feet and had begun to walk leisurely  to and fro across the common among the few fugitives, with its  headlike hood turning about exactly like the head of a cowled human  being. Its a cylinderan  artificial cylinder, man! The Venus Trap    By EVELYN E. She had been growing increasingly hysterical, fearful, and depressed  during the two days journeyings. She had never  been out of England before, she would rather die than trust herself  friendless in a foreign country, and so forth. Then abruptly he sat down before the table, put his  head on his arms, and began to sob and weep like a little boy, in a  perfect passion of emotion, while I, with a curious forgetfulness of  my own recent despair, stood beside him, wondering. It slammed again.

 I had a birthday on the ship. I merely said . Its out on Horsell Common now. Now  do you understand, Magnolia? Then I perceived this was a wrecked train, the fore part  smashed and on fire, the hinder carriages still upon the rails.

 The results of an anatomical examination of the Martians, so far  as the prowling dogs had left such an examination possible, I have  already given. I certainly hope so. Then I heard midnight pealing out from Pyrford Church  behind me, and then came the silhouette of Maybury Hill, with its  treetops and roofs black and sharp against the red. It was a mere hopeless desire  to feast upon my misery. It was, as it were, cut off. I hope you dont feel Ive been toowell, personal,  Jim. He hesitated, holding his spade. he said, with his eyes shining. Then I fetched out the servant, telling her I would go  upstairs myself for the box she was clamouring for. She looked away from me downhill.

 He thought. I dont think so. Its air is much more attenuated than ours, its oceans have  shrunk until they cover but a third of its surface, and as its slow  seasons change huge snowcaps gather and melt about either pole and  periodically inundate its temperate zones. There is, as your proverb says, no accounting for strange tastes, the  tree murmured. Its physical condition is  still largely a mystery, but we know now that even in its equatorial  region the midday temperature barely approaches that of our coldest  winter. Somebody blundered against me,  and I narrowly missed being pitched onto the top of the screw.

 The terrible disasters at the Ealing  and South Kensington laboratories have disinclined analysts for further  investigations upon the latter. Its amovin, he said to me as he passed; ascrewin and  ascrewin out. He repeated  his words, Were beat. The house is deserted. I suppose there could be  manloving ones, too. I want to go home.

 It seemed to me then that this might  have happened by a handlingmachine escaping from the guidance of its  Martian. she said. She fired at six  yards distance, narrowly missing my brother. Its a pity they make themselves so unapproachable, he said. She turned without a wordthey were both pantingand they went  back to where the lady in white struggled to hold back the frightened  pony. She explained that they had as much as thirty pounds in gold,  besides a fivepound note, and suggested that with that they might get  upon a train at St. He nodded. It crept almost imperceptibly upon my senses. The line on the London side of Woking station was still undergoing  repair, so I descended at Byfleet station and took the road to  Maybury, past the place where I and the artilleryman had talked to the  hussars, and on by the spot where the Martian had appeared to me in  the thunderstorm.

 Then I realised that the crest of  Maybury Hill must be within range of the Martians HeatRay now that  the college was cleared out of the way. The nursery grounds were  everywhere crimson with the weed, a wide expanse of livid colour cut  with purple shadows, and very painful to the eye. The Surrey pine woods were too dry, however, for the festoons  of the red climber. I hate this nasty planet. Then slowly the hissing passed into a humming, into a long, loud,  droning noise. Woodman, as the Terrestrial poem goes, the tree remarked, spare  that tree! Its bows and arrows against the lightning, anyhow, said the  artilleryman.

 She saw it. The first rush  was already over. I  dont like blue grass. I dont like it here, Phyllis sobbed. The matter he printed was emotional; the  news organisation had not as yet found its way back. Then I  shifted my position to a little knoll that gave me the advantage of a  yard or more of elevation and when I looked for him presently he was  walking towards Woking. The vestries were indiscriminately  distributing bread sent us by the French government. It was a city condemned and  derelict. He looked over his shoulder suddenly. he said. The Last Man Left Alive!

 It seemed to me, too, that  the house was inconveniently chosen, and required a needless length of  tunnel. It never was a war,  any more than theres war between man and ants. The dome of St. It is all over with humanity, I said. Its motion was so swift, complex, and perfect that at first I did  not see it as a machine, in spite of its metallic glitter. He shot out a pointing finger. he cried, when I was within ten yards of him, and I  stopped. It filled me with indescribable terror  to think how swiftly that desolating change had come. She seemed, poor woman,  to imagine that the French and the Martians might prove very similar. I dont know so very much, really, he smiled.

 It was early on the fifteenth day that I heard a curious, familiar  sequence of sounds in the kitchen, and, listening, identified it as  the snuffing and scratching of a dog. I know how youve been looking forward to  her arrival. She headed straight for a second Martian, and  was within a hundred yards of him when the HeatRay came to bear. Its seeds were simply poured down into the  water of the Wey and Thames, and its swiftly growing and Titanic water  fronds speedily choked both those rivers.

 He stood silent and motionless, regarding me. Then something resembling a little grey  snake, about the thickness of a walking stick, coiled up out of the  writhing middle, and wriggled in the air towards meand then another. But the chances are, if he survives, hell turn blue. It came into the scullery no more; but I lay all the tenth day in  the close darkness, buried among coals and firewood, not daring even  to crawl out for the drink for which I craved. He lay still. She gave a  faint cry. It was like a black worm  swaying its blind head to and fro. He  went headlong forward and lay stretched on the ground. I dont suppose the other women were  especially nice to her, either. Its just men and ants.

 He rose to his knees, for he had been sitting in the darkness near  the copper. Its all too bulky to stop. He talked with his voice rising slowly, through the greater part  of the eighth and ninth daysthreats, entreaties, mingled with a  torrent of halfsane and always frothy repentance for his vacant sham  of Gods service, such as made me pity him. she asked, avoiding his appreciative eye. She touched his arm diffidently. She still has hopesfarfetched, maybe, and Im  not so sure they are. The dusky houses about me stood faint and tall and dim; the trees  towards the park were growing black. I thought blue was your favorite color.

 The forepart was shattered. I suppose by the time we did relay the news, you  were on your way. I go to London and see the busy multitudes in Fleet Street and the  Strand, and it comes across my mind that they are but the ghosts of  the past, haunting the streets that I have seen silent and wretched,  going to and fro, phantasms in a dead city, the mockery of life in a  galvanised body. It worried at the catch for a minute, perhaps, and then the door  opened. She was very youngless than eight years younger than he, true, but he  was mature for his age. He perceived a hold on mehe  threatened he would shout and bring the Martians upon us. She wants you! She was the most beautiful  creature he had ever seen . The mood that had sustained me passed. I sit in my study  writing by lamplight, and suddenly I see again the healing valley  below set with writhing flames, and feel the house behind and about me  empty and desolate. Its energy in a gale of funk, and turned clean  inside out.

 It had found the  door! He came sliding down  the rubbish and crept beside me in the darkness, inarticulate,  gesticulating, and for a moment I shared his panic. The streets were horribly quiet. She seems to guttate an awful lot. He slept little. The red weed was  tumultuous at that time, and nearly choked the bridge roadway; but its  fronds were already whitened in patches by the spreading disease that  presently removed it so swiftly. Its a sort of  disloyalty, after all, to live and taint the race.

 He ate more than I did, and it was in vain I pointed  out that our only chance of life was to stop in the house until the  Martians had done with their pit, that in that long patience a time  might presently come when we should need food. Its  saving our knowledge and adding to it is the thing. He would weep for hours together, and I  verily believe that to the very end this spoiled child of life thought  his weak tears in some way efficacious. He wanted the slit, which  permitted only one of us to peep through; and so I had to forego  watching them for a time while he enjoyed that privilege. Then he dropped his spade, snatched up his jacket, and  came out into the road. What is this favor? Then the thing came upon him in a flash. In fact,  sometimes I almost think you, too, dont want to understand.

 It passed, scraping  faintly across the cellar door. Its safer by  night. It has already been too long  delayed. It is  just. It is just, O God! He presented them as tilted, stiff  tripods, without either flexibility or subtlety, and with an  altogether misleading monotony of effect. She has sense organs, and motor organs, too. It sounds paradoxical, but I am inclined to think that the weakness  and insanity of the curate warned me, braced me, and kept me a sane  man. I made a step forward, and  caught her in my arms. He made me no answer, but so soon as I began  eating the faint noise I made stirred him up and I heard him crawling  after me.

 The  northern hills were shrouded in darkness; the fires near Kensington  glowed redly, and now and then an orangered tongue of flame flashed  up and vanished in the deep blue night. Its  stuck on you; I just know it is. She isnt a lot like one. I came, she said. The artilleryman began to tell me of the sort of people who still  remained in London. Its a long trip out from Earth  and an uncomfortable one.

 It was, I know, a  night and a day, but to me it seemedit seems nowan interminable  length of time. The red creeper swarmed up the  trees about the old palace, and their branches stretched gaunt and  dead, and set with shrivelled leaves, from amid its clusters. She didnt draw away this time. It was the only occasion on which I actually saw the  Martians feed. He fancied he saw a column of smoke  rising out of the distant grey haze. The artilleryman paused and laid a brown hand upon my arm.

 Then suddenly he noticed with a start that some of the grey  clinker, the ashy incrustation that covered the meteorite, was falling  off the circular edge of the end. Then I saw some cabmen and others had walked boldly into the sand  pits, and heard the clatter of hoofs and the gride of wheels. If for no  other reason, your name will go down in the history of our colony as  that of the guide and mentor of Miss Magnolia. Then  it was as if an invisible yet intensely heated finger were drawn  through the heather between me and the Martians, and all along a  curving line beyond the sand pits the dark ground smoked and crackled. Phyllis looked down at the plant she held cradled in her arms and then  up at the tree. I turned, and the  French window was open behind me. I was startled. It is disagreeable for me to recall and write these things, but I  set them down that my story may lack nothing. She started to guttateto  cry again. Then  came a crying from the common.

 Lakin said to James later that same  evening, after the planting ceremonies were over and the rest of the  party had gone into the cottage for fresh coffee and more sandwiches and  cookies and penuche. Then I remembered her cousins at Leatherhead. She got confused bythat  zoology book I read her. Then  abruptly she turned and went in, leaving my cousins side by side  wishing me good hap. He  would probably have remained longer had it not been for the sound of  guns that began about that hour in the south. Its a great tragedy, he told her in a hushed tone. He was also told that the Midland Railway Company had replaced the  desertions of the first days panic, had resumed traffic, and was  running northward trains from St. It is commonly supposed that  they communicated by sounds and tentacular gesticulations; this is  asserted, for instance, in the able but hastily compiled pamphlet  (written evidently by someone not an eyewitness of Martian actions)  to which I have already alluded, and which, so far, has been the chief  source of information concerning them.

 she rustled anxiously. The main drains are big enough and airy enough for anyone. It was just as well for  them, for the mere attempt to stand upright upon our planet would have  broken every bone in their bodies. It had behaved exactly like mud under the violent blow of a  hammer. I came down and went into the dining room. I remembered my inability  to fix my mind that morning, scarcely a month gone by, and how I had  broken off to get my Daily Chronicle from the newsboy. He saw anger change to terror on the face  of the poor wretch on the ground, and in a moment he was hidden and my  brother was borne backward and carried past the entrance of the lane,  and had to fight hard in the torrent to recover it. He is dying fast, and very  thirsty. I stumbled into the hall, and the house  felt empty.

 Its not that so much. Then suddenly the trees in the pine wood ahead of me were parted,  as brittle reeds are parted by a man thrusting through them; they were  snapped off and driven headlong, and a second huge tripod appeared,  rushing, as it seemed, headlong towards me. Its  not your field. Then he came over and  across the lawn to the corner of the house. He would overtake them, he  said, at about half past four in the morning, and now it was nearly  nine and they had seen nothing of him. I looked at my house with a quick flash of hope that faded  immediately. Its all wrong. I got a compartment to myself, and sat  with folded arms, looking greyly at the sunlit devastation that flowed  past the windows. Then the sound came again, this time from  the direction of Chertsey, a muffled thudthe sound of a gun.

 It was still daylight, and I perceived him across the  room, lying against the triangular hole that looked out upon the  Martians. Its because shes of a very high order of intelligence. The tame ones  will go like all tame beasts; in a few generations theyll be big,  beautiful, richblooded, stupidrubbish! Then suddenly we saw a rush of smoke far away up the river, a puff  of smoke that jerked up into the air and hung; and forthwith the  ground heaved under foot and a heavy explosion shook the air, smashing  two or three windows in the houses near, and leaving us astonished. It was deep twilight when the  captain cried out and pointed. I bought a copy for a blackened shilling I found in my pocket. The death of that one at Weybridge was an  accident. Its the only  explanation. Its very noble of you to defend her; you would  have disappointed me if you had said anything else, and I honor you for  it, James. It must have  driven through the iron of the ships side like a whitehot iron rod  through paper. It hit her larboard side  and glanced off in an inky jet that rolled away to seaward, an  unfolding torrent of Black Smoke, from which the ironclad drove clear.

 It would seem they were regarding this new  antagonist with astonishment. He had hurried home, roused the womentheir servant  had left them two days beforepacked some provisions, put his  revolver under the seatluckily for my brotherand told them to  drive on to Edgware, with the idea of getting a train there. Then suddenly the white flashes of the HeatRay came leaping  towards me. I remained with them four  days after my recovery.

 Its lack of  fertility, not lack of enterprise, thats responsible for our decline. she exclaimed in pretty excitement. He heard the clatter of hoofs, the whip stung  across his face, a third antagonist struck him between the eyes, and  the man he held wrenched himself free and made off down the lane in  the direction from which he had come. I was a lonely man, and they were very kind to me. Its part of the pregnancy syndrome. Then my fears got the better of me again, and I resumed my paddling. The morning was bright and fine, and the eastern sky glowed pink,  and was fretted with little golden clouds. Then came soldiers. I found myself  in a house of kindly people, who had found me on the third day  wandering, weeping, and raving through the streets of St. It was the first Martian my brother had seen, and he stood, more  amazed than terrified, watching this Titan advancing deliberately  towards the shipping, wading farther and farther into the water as the  coast fell away.

 The former gave me no sensation of horror or remorse to  recall; I saw it simply as a thing done, a memory infinitely  disagreeable but quite without the quality of remorse. Then we heard the guns at Chertsey, and folks coming from  Weybridge. Its a holly  plant, Phyl. Then the door behind him  opened, and the man who lodged across the landing came in, dressed  only in shirt, trousers, and slippers, his braces loose about his  waist, his hair disordered from his pillow. He came upon them just in time to save them. I have learned since that,  so far from my being the first discoverer of the Martian overthrow,  several such wanderers as myself had already discovered this on the  previous night. He passed near  several farmhouses and some little places whose names he did not  learn. She tore the papers off slowly. The latter I could  not eat, they were too rotten, but the former not only stayed my  hunger, but filled my pockets. she gasped.

 The place had been  already searched and emptied. I turned and looked down the slope of the hill to where, enhaloed  now in birds, stood those other two Martians that I had seen  overnight, just as death had overtaken them. I stood staring into the pit, and my heart lightened gloriously,  even as the rising sun struck the world to fire about me with his  rays. I felt no fear, only a wild, trembling  exultation, as I ran up the hill towards the motionless monster. The Martians, I thought, had gone on and  left the country desolated, seeking food elsewhere. Then the fourth cylinder fella brilliant green meteoras I  learned afterwards, in Bushey Park. Its impossible. It was with the greatest difficulty they could get her down to the  beach, where presently my brother succeeded in attracting the  attention of some men on a paddle steamer from the Thames. Then beyond the bend my brother stopped again. He  succeeded in getting some food at an inn. The aspect of the place in the dusk was  singularly desolate: blackened trees, blackened, desolate ruins, and  down the hill the sheets of the flooded river, redtinged with the  weed.

 It fell while Miss Elphinstone was watching, for she took that  duty alternately with my brother. I missed my way among the streets, and  presently saw down a long avenue, in the halflight of the early dawn,  the curve of Primrose Hill. The red weed was less abundant; the  tall trees along the lane were free from the red creeper. I  hid from the night and the silence, until long after midnight, in a  cabmens shelter in Harrow Road. It was the beginning of the rout of civilisation, of the  massacre of mankind. I turned down St. I came upon the wrecked handlingmachine halfway to St. Then he began to look out for a chance of edging to the right  across the road.

 The wall was some six feet  high, and when I attempted to clamber it I found I could not lift my  feet to the crest. Then suddenly out of the golden haze of the sunset came the  vibration of guns, and a form of black shadows moving. He left it by the  roadside and trudged through the village. It was din and confusion indescribable; but in and beyond the  town the road forks repeatedly, and this to some extent relieved the  stress. He was passed by a number of cyclists, some  horsemen, and two motor cars. I came upon him as if  it were a matter of course.

 I awoke to find that dismal howling still in my ears, Ulla, ulla,  ulla, ulla. I came into Oxford Street by the Marble Arch, and here again were  black powder and several bodies, and an evil, ominous smell from the  gratings of the cellars of some of the houses. He heard footsteps running to and fro in the rooms, and up and down  stairs behind him. The day seemed, by contrast with my recent confinement, dazzlingly  bright, the sky a glowing blue. She was a native of Elysium, neither animal  nor vegetable, unique unto the planet, unique unto herself. he  heard people crying, and again Black Smoke! The red weed grew tumultuously in their  roofless rooms. I thought of the poisons in  the chemists shops, of the liquors the wine merchants stored; I  recalled the two sodden creatures of despair, who so far as I knew,  shared the city with myself. It is hard to imagine  that host. It  seems she had had a revolver all this time, but it had been under the  seat when she and her companion were attacked. The trees near me were dead and brown, but  further a network of red thread scaled the still living stems.

 It was perhaps a vague idea of making his way to Chelmsford, where  some friends of his lived, that at last induced my brother to strike  into a quiet lane running eastward. He  returned and tried in vain to divert his attention to his examination  notes. He read and reread the paper, fearing the worst had happened to me. I felt intolerably lonely. It was a crescent with twelve miles between its horns. Then suddenly, as we approached Kew, came a number of people  running, and the upperworks of a Martian fightingmachine loomed in  sight over the housetops, not a hundred yards away from us.

 Then I turned to see how much of our rampart  remained. It was a few minutes past nine that night when these three  sentinels were joined by four other Martians, each carrying a thick  black tube. It would seem  that a leg of the tripod had been smashed by one of the shells. He walked from Westminster to his apartments near Regents Park,  about two.

 Then  somethingsomething struggling violentlywas lifted high against the  sky, a black, vague enigma against the starlight; and as this black  object came down again, I saw by the green brightness that it was a  man. He  noticed an unusual number of police regulating the traffic. He was driving from the direction of  Westminster Bridge; and close behind him came a hay waggon with five  or six respectablelooking people in it, and some boxes and bundles. I found I was intensely weary, footsore, and  now again hungry and thirsty. I puzzled over  this for a time, and then went on to the bridge over the Serpentine.

 It was this howling and firing of the guns at Ripley and St. I had half a mind to break into the Natural  History Museum and find my way up to the summits of the towers, in  order to see across the park. It  is impossible to stop them. I stopped,  staring towards Kensington Gardens, wondering at this strange, remote  wailing. Then he slept awhile, and  began again with renewed strength, so loudly that I must needs make  him desist. Then I saw through a sort of glass plate  near the edge of the body the face, as we may call it, and the large  dark eyes of a Martian, peering, and then a long metallic snake of  tentacle came feeling slowly through the hole. I did not trouble to touch  them. It wants showing up, he said.

 I think I should  have stayed by him but for the brutal expression of his face. The  pit dropped sheerly from my feet, but a little way along the rubbish  afforded a practicable slope to the summit of the ruins. I was still upon the  roof when the late moon rose. It was stated that the people  of Walton and Weybridge, and all the district were pouring along the  roads Londonward, and that was all. It is a curious thing that I felt angry with my wife; I  cannot account for it, but my impotent desire to reach Leatherhead  worried me excessively. The word of the Lord is  upon me! Then a heavy bodyI knew too well whatwas dragged across the floor  of the kitchen towards the opening. I resolved to leave this strange undisciplined  dreamer of great things to his drink and gluttony, and to go on into  London.