#Chapter 1: Pirates



 Piracy is an offence against the universal law of society, a pirate being according to Sir Edward Coke, stis humani generis. Deceiving themselves in the supposition that Avery had outsailed them during the night, they held on their course to the place of rendezvouse; but, arriving there, to their sad disappointment no ship appeared. Having had no food since we got the tortoise, John Anthony and myself set out in search of fresh water, and three remained with the boat. Gray not only saved his money, but being suddenly smit  with the desire to rise, also studied his profession, and he is now  mate and part owner of a fine fullrigged ship, married besides, and the  father of a family. Gray and Ben Gunn came and  went with the boat, while the rest during their absences piled treasure  on the beach. Gray and Hunter were the first to come forward. Gray told me nothing, and I asked  him nothing; and whats more, I would see you and him and this whole  island blown clean out of the water into blazes first. Gray and I were sitting together at the far end of the block house, to  be out of earshot of our officers consulting; and Gray took his pipe out  of his mouth and fairly forgot to put it back again, so thunderstruck  he was at this occurrence.

 He had cut through a bulkhead unobserved and had removed  one of the sacks of coin, worth perhaps three or four hundred guineas,  to help him on his further wanderings. The bar silver and the arms still lie, for all that I know, where  Flint buried them; and certainly they shall lie there for me. Then he was given a lodge to keep,  exactly as he had feared upon the island; and he still lives, a great  favourite, though something of a butt, with the country boys, and a  notable singer in church on Sundays and saints days. I suppose you would hardly ask me to call you a humane man, returned  the doctor with a sneer, and so my feelings may surprise you, Master  Silver.

 I tell you, but Silver was anxious to keep up with us. And there was Silver, sitting back almost out of the  firelight, but eating heartily, prompt to spring forward when anything  was wanted, even joining quietly in our laughterthe same bland,  polite, obsequious seaman of the voyage out. It was just at sundown when we cast anchor in a most beautiful  landlocked gulf, and were immediately surrounded by shore boats full  of Negroes and Mexican Indians and halfbloods selling fruits and  vegetables and offering to dive for bits of money. It went to all our hearts, I think, to leave them in that  wretched state; but we could not risk another mutiny; and to take them  home for the gibbet would have been a cruel sort of kindness. Let the worst come to the worst, its little I care. Let that suffice. And by this time we had reached the gigs.

 Its always a ship, and they can get to  buccaneering again, I suppose. And so its you, Ben Gunn! He was brave, and no mistake. Next moment I was face to face  with Anderson. Let the supplications of that mother touch your hearts, and shield their object from the law. And suddenly, not ten yards further, we beheld them stop. Then you can talk. It was a large, airy place, with  a little spring and a pool of clear water, overhung with ferns. I could hear his teeth rattle in his head,  but he had not yet surrendered. It was the  squire, and we waved a handkerchief and gave him three cheers, in which  the voice of Silver joined as heartily as any. It dont make much odds, do it, now?

 and he snapped his big fingers, halting a moment on his  crutch. The three fellows must have been watching us closer than we thought for,  as we soon had proved. And the rest were all too terrified to reply. He held it up with a perfect spout of oaths. And then, making a great effort: Shipmates,  he cried, Im here to get that stuff, and Ill not be beat by man or  devil. He had been well brought  up, had Dick, before he came to sea and fell among bad companions. He were an ugly devil, cried a third pirate with a shudder; that blue  in the face too! He had still a foot in either camp, and there was no doubt he  would prefer wealth and freedom with the pirates to a bare escape from  hanging, which was the best he had to hope on our side. Let us imagine for a moment that we see the souls standing before the awful tribunal, and we hear its dreadful sentence, depart ye cursed into everlasting fire.

 Then here goes! Then I looked around me, and as the  ship was now, in a sense, my own, I began to think of clearing it from  its last passengerthe dead man, OBrien. and by E. Next moment we were both groping downstairs, leaving the candle by  the empty chest; and the next we had opened the door and were in full  retreat. Then he lay quiet for a little, and  then, pulling out a stick of tobacco, begged me to cut him a quid. It was liker  somebody elses voice nowit was liker    By the powers, Ben Gunn!

 he cried. It was, indeed, a most  pleasant portion of the island that we were now approaching. While I was thus turning the business over in my mind, I had not been  idle with my body. I saw him dead with these here deadlights, said Morgan. Let me then, in this public manner, return my sincere thanks to him, for his kind and gentlemanly deportment during my confinement. I thought so, cried the cook; this here is a pinter.

 Let none of his friends or relations ever venture to seahe hoped his death would be a warning to them, that the innocent might suffer for the guilty. Its a pity, sir, we lost that second load. I believe a  chill struck for a moment to every heart. Next we procured the timbers of ribs, which, to avoid the same hazard, were in three pieces each, and jointed in two places. While we lay hulling up and down, our hopes at so low an ebb, we discovered a tortoise, not far from us, asleep in the sea. Next to the Cassaubah, the mole with the marine forts, presented the handsomest and most imposing pile of buildings. It seemed to me so obvious, in this case, that I could not  imagine how he was to turn their anger. The three fellows still abroad upon the island did  not greatly trouble us; a single sentry on the shoulder of the hill was  sufficient to ensure us against any sudden onslaught, and we thought,  besides, they had had more than enough of fighting. Then I lashed the tiller and went below to my own chest, where I got a  soft silk handkerchief of my mothers. While we were getting into her, one of my fellow prisoners, a Spaniard, attempted with tears in his eyes to speak to the captain, but was refused with the answer. Its not them I mind; its the roundshot.

 Let the reader conceive our apprehensions, after all our toil and labor, of being seized by some Turkish privateer, such as are never off the seas. Then he went the rounds and saw, as he said, that all was clear. She was  stockstill but for the current. While Vane was upon this island, a ship put in there from Jamaica for water, the captain of which, one Holford, an old buccaneer, happened to be Vanes acquaintance. And then, mates, us  that has the boats, I reckon, has the upper hand. He called them all the fools and dolts  you can imagine, said it was necessary I should talk to the doctor,  fluttered the chart in their faces, asked them if they could afford to  break the treaty the very day they were bound atreasurehunting. She headed nearly due south, yawing, of course, all  the time. Next morning he paid the prisoners a visit and ordered them to the capital, called together the principal people of the town, and desired each to select one as a servant. it cried. It  dont bind no moren a balladbook.

 She would swear the same, in a manner of speaking, before  chaplain. The last flood had  lifted her, and had there been much wind or a strong tide current, as  in the southern anchorage, we should never have found her more, or found  her stranded beyond help. While they lay at anchor, and were employed in taking in water, one of the abovementioned fleet moved towards them with English colors, and was answered by the pirate with a red ensign; but they did not hail each other. She was at the boarding of the viceroy of the Indies out of  Goa, she was; and to look at her you would think she was a babby. Let young Hawkins go at once to see his       mother, with Redruth for a guard; and then both       come full speed to Bristol. he roared and looked about him positively like a lion. It is for  you to choose. And first, Ill give you a  bit of hope; Silver, if we both get alive out of this wolftrap, Ill do  my best to save you, short of perjury.

 And youll put that down for me too, for its a  long stretch, is that! Let us overhaul these patients of  yours. Then he advanced to the  stockade, threw over his crutch, got a leg up, and with great vigour  and skill succeeded in surmounting the fence and dropping safely to the  other side. Then he put his head on  one side, and looked at me. The doctor sent back Gray for one of the pickaxes deserted, in their  flight, by the mutineers, and then as we proceeded leisurely downhill to  where the boats were lying, related in a few words what had taken place. The buccaneers, with oaths  and cries, began to leap, one after another, into the pit and to dig  with their fingers, throwing the boards aside as they did so. He himself slept  peacefully and snored aloud, yet my heart was sore for him, wicked as he  was, to think on the dark perils that environed and the shameful gibbet  that awaited him.

 And youll not forget what I done good, not any more  than youll forget the bad, I know. Next morning these boats were brought to the fleet; ten or twelve men were taken in them. It was red and hot, and now and again it was a little  darkenedas it were, the embers of a bonfire smouldering. I had a  line about my waist and followed obediently after the seacook, who  held the loose end of the rope, now in his free hand, now between his  powerful teeth. It would have been a poor end of my adventures to get  shot down by my own party in mistake. Its to you, Abraham Grayits to you I am speaking. Its a pleasant thing to be young and have ten toes, and you  may lay to that.

 She was at the  fishing up of the wrecked plate ships. Its my  belief neither of you gentlemen know what you are about, but Ill tell  you my way of itlife or death, and a close run. While there, he had the command of a boat employed in bringing logwood to the ship. While the boat was conveying them, Soto held in his hand a cutlass, reddened with the blood of the murdered captain, and stood scowling on them with silence: while another ruffian, with a lighted match, stood by the long gun, ready to support the boarding, if necessary, with a shot that would sweep the deck. Its a way of speaking, said the captain. While Barbazan was employed in superintending the clearing of the decks, the arming and breakfasting of the men, he walked rapidly up and down, revolving in his mind the plan of the approaching attack, and when interrupted by any of the crew, he would run into a volley of imprecations. Then he pulled me aside. Next day Mr. It cost him no end of time and groans  to haul his wounded leg behind him, and I had quietly finished my  arrangements before he was much more than a third of the way up. Next morning we arrived in the suburbs, where the singularity of our attire, being barefoot and bare legged, and having nothing on except loose shirts, drawn over our coats, attracted a crowd of enquirers.

 She was refused, as being in every respect opposite to the description of the person sent for. Next morning the seal was perfect, the sentry at his post, but the bullion was gone through a small hole made in the back wall. and he snapped his  fingers. he asked; and when I had refused: Well,  Ill take a drain myself, Jim, said he. Next moment we had turned the corner and my home was out of sight. And then he bade them get the fire lit, and stalked out upon his crutch,  with his hand on my shoulder, leaving them in a disarray, and silenced  by his volubility rather than convinced. And now I should wish to have a talk with that boy,  please.

 Next best thing to tell the truth, muttered Captain Smollett. I seen the doctor waving you to run for  itwith the tail of my eye, I did; and I seen you say no, as plain as  hearing. The third rose nearly two hundred feet  into the air above a clump of underwooda giant of a vegetable, with  a red column as big as a cottage, and a wide shadow around in which a  company could have manoeuvred. I remembered with confusion my  insubordinate and stealthy conduct, and when I saw where it had brought  meamong what companions and surrounded by what dangersI felt ashamed  to look him in the face. The first of the tall trees was reached, and by the bearings proved the  wrong one. And the doctor it was. While steering their course, Avery sent a boat to each of the sloops, requesting that the chiefs would come on board his ship to hold a conference. This was a run of eight or nine miles. Its the name of a buccaneer of my  acquaintance; and I call you by it for the sake of shortness, and what I  have to say to you is this; one glass of rum wont kill you, but if  you take one youll take another and another, and I stake my wig if you  dont break off short, youll diedo you understand that? I have that curiosity beside me at this moment, but  not a trace of writing now remains beyond a single scratch, such as a  man might make with his thumbnail. He drew some cognac from the cask into a tin cannikin.

 She dreaded being refused, and sent back to the horrid dungeon she was leaving where no difference was paid to rank, and slaves of all conditions were huddled together. It was such  a game as I had often played at home about the rocks of Black Hill Cove,  but never before, you may be sure, with such a wildly beating heart as  now. He hobbled to the torch, where it stood propped among the firewood, and  took a fresh light to his pipe. I knowed him  well, says another. Then we reloaded and turned our attention to poor  Tom. he added, returning his pipe to his mouth.

 I made a hash o this cruise, did I? He drew again quietly at his pipe. He still wore the fine broadcloth suit in which he had fulfilled his  mission, but it was bitterly the worse for wear, daubed with clay and  torn with the sharp briers of the wood. It was a sad sight, but it showed us  that the anchorage was calm. It was a smile  that had in it something both of pain and weaknessa haggard old mans  smile; but there was, besides that, a grain of derision, a shadow of  treachery, in his expression as he craftily watched, and watched, and  watched me at my work. And now, shipmates, this  black spot?

 Then rest his soul for a true seaman! While Alexis was occupied in a war with Patzinaces, on the banks of the Danube, Zachas, a Saracen pirate, scoured the Archipelago, having, with the assistance of an able Smyrniote, constructed a flotilla of forty brigantines, and some light fastrowing boats, manned by adventurers like himself. For my part,  as I was not much use at carrying, I was kept busy all day in the cave  packing the minted money into breadbags. Its well, said the pirate, for had you been ill treated, I would have put all these rascals to the sword. It was such a scene of confusion as you can hardly fancy. While Lafitte and his followers, seconding a gallant band of volunteer riflemen, formed a phalanx which they in vain assayed to penetrate. I thought you said you knowed the rules, returned Silver  contemptuously. I could just make out that he  had a book as well as a knife in his hand, and was still wondering how  anything so incongruous had come in their possession when the kneeling  figure rose once more to his feet and the whole party began to move  together towards the house. I turned to the loophole nearest me and looked out. He looked upon it for  a moment, thrusting forth his under jaw, tried the point upon his hand,  and then, hastily concealing it in the bosom of his jacket, trundled  back again into his old place against the bulwark.

 Its been meat and drink, and man and wife,  to me; and if Im not to have my rum now Im a poor old hulk on a lee  shore, my bloodll be on you, Jim, and that doctor swab; and he ran on  again for a while with curses. Its these people of the innits that boy. It was very tiring and slow work, yet I did visibly gain ground; and as  we drew near the Cape of the Woods, though I saw I must infallibly  miss that point, I had still made some hundred yards of easting. And now I resign, by thunder! The  pines, great and small, grew wide apart; and even between the clumps of  nutmeg and azalea, wide open spaces baked in the hot sunshine. She was vain and bold in her disposition, but susceptible of the tenderest emotions, and of the most melting affections. And number three? She replied, that, As to hanging, she thought it no great hardship, for were it not for that, every cowardly fellow would turn pirate, and so infest the seas; and men of courage would starve. And youre the last above board of that same meddling crew;  and you have the Davy Joness insolence to up and stand for capn over  meyou, that sank the lot of us!

 He had risen from his position to his hands and knees, and though his  leg obviously hurt him pretty sharply when he movedfor I could hear  him stifle a groanyet it was at a good, rattling rate that he trailed  himself across the deck. The  colour went from their six faces like enchantment; some leaped to their  feet, some clawed hold of others; Morgan grovelled on the ground. It was plain she was not to be  interfered with, and at that rate, since I could in no way influence her  course, what hope had I left of reaching land? She indeed, frequently declared, that the life of a pirate was what she detested, and that she was constrained to it both on the former and present occasion. Then I came to a long thicket of these oaklike treeslive, or  evergreen, oaks, I heard afterwards they should be calledwhich grew  low along the sand like brambles, the boughs curiously twisted, the  foliage compact, like thatch. Then there followed a great todo through all our old inn, heavy feet  pounding to and fro, furniture thrown over, doors kicked in, until the  very rocks reechoed and the men came out again, one after another, on  the road and declared that we were nowhere to be found. And then, fourth, theres this here boy. He watched me keenly and slyly, his chin all the while on his breast.

 The body pointed straight in the direction of the island,  and the compass read duly E. She had 200,000 dollars in specie, and other valuable articles on board. While Judge Betts was delivering his address to them, Wansley was deeply affected and shed tearsbut Gibbs gazed with a steady and unwavering eye, and no sign betrayed the least emotion of his heart. I know when  a games up, I do; and I know a lad thats staunch. He grunted, or rather, I might say, he barked. Its the glory of the sea       that has turned my head. It was at first mere  instinct, but once I had it in my hands and found it fast, curiosity  began to get the upper hand, and I determined I should have one look  through the cabin window. And he took another swallow of the brandy, shaking his great fair head  like a man who looks forward to the worst.

 She manned and armed two more boats for us. It was already late in the afternoon,  although still warm and sunny. he roared in a voice of thunder. It was plainly a damp,  feverish, unhealthy spot. The party spread itself abroad, in a fan shape, shouting and leaping to  and fro.

 he roared. I guess Hands  and OBrien turned soft. He had been  growing nettled before, but now he pulled himself together. The top of the plateau was dotted thickly  with pinetrees of varying height. The red cross  was, of course, far too large to be a guide; and the terms of the note  on the back, as you will hear, admitted of some ambiguity. The other men were variously burthened, some carrying picks and  shovelsfor that had been the very first necessary they brought ashore  from the HISPANIOLAothers laden with pork, bread, and brandy for the  midday meal. It was still quite early, and the coldest morning that I think I ever  was abroad ina chill that pierced into the marrow. I know youve got that ship safe  somewheres.

 I didnt mean to; no, not  till you spoke up. While at Princes Island, Capt. Its Black Dog! He wasnt dead when I got  round to him, not he. He was tricked out in his best;  an immense blue coat, thick with brass buttons, hung as low as to his  knees, and a fine laced hat was set on the back of his head. She had no masts, spars, rigging, furniture, provisions or any think left, except her bowsprit, and a few barrels of salt provisions of her cargo. She proved leaky, for we had no carpenters yard, or smiths shop to go to.

 She struck, and the pirates took possession, and carried her away to a small island called Barnacho, where they cleaned. It occurred to me that this might be the white rock of which Ben  Gunn had spoken and that some day or other a boat might be wanted and I  should know where to look for one. He was whistling Come, Lasses and Lads. I ax your pardon, sir,  acknowledging you for to be captaing at this present; but I claim my  right, and steps outside for a council. The explosion of disapproval, which nothing but Silvers black looks had  restrained, broke out immediately the doctor had left the house. The very same Jim as ever was, says Silver. Then it struck sharp on the inn door, and then we could hear the handle  being turned and the bolt rattling as the wretched being tried to enter;  and then there was a long time of silence both within and without. And talking o trouble, why did that doctor give me the  chart, Jim? The black spot! While the unconscious crew were proceeding, as usual, to catch seals on this island, lying about three leagues from the main land of Arauca, an armed body of men rushed from the woods, and overpowering them, tied their hands behind them, and left them under a guard on the beach.

 It did all our hearts good to see him spit in his  hand, knit his brows, and make the blade sing through the air. He turned and spoke to  us, Doctors watch on the lookout. It is something to have been an old soldier, but more still to have been  a doctor. It seemed dark and  shaggy; more I knew not. Then my mother  got a candle in the bar, and holding each others hands, we advanced  into the parlour. Then he rapped on the door with a bit of  stick like a handspike that he carried, and when my father appeared,  called roughly for a glass of rum. Its there she learned Pieces  of eight, and little wonder; three hundred and fifty thousand of em,  Hawkins! She had been the latter, belonging to the French king, and could mount 50 guns; but being taken by the English, she was bought by some London merchants, and fitted out from that port to slave at Madagascar, and go to Jamaica. While in the fort, his eyes were keenly employed to discover the position of the arms, and how the fort might most successfully be surprised.

 Its  trying on a man, I know. he asked. It was all over,  I thought. While off the island, they lost several of their anchors by the rockiness of the ground; and one day, blowing more violently than usual, they were forced to take to sea, leaving several people and most of the watercasks; but when the gale was over, they returned to take in their men and water. It is one thing  to be idle and skulk and quite another to take a ship and murder a  number of innocent men. Then Lord Exmouth, having seen only the smoke of the gun, before the sound reached him, said, with great alacrity, That will do; fire my fine fellows! She took great care of his education, and when he was grown up, as he had an inclination to the sea, procured him the kings letter.

 She was built at the latter end of the war, for a privateer, was an excellent sailer, and mounted 24 guns. And he sprang up, drawing his knife as if he had been twenty. While under the direction of Trumpet, some proposed to proceed directly to Madagascar, but others were disposed to wait until they should be provided with a store ship. He were afraid of none, not he; ony SilverSilver was that  genteel. While the fleet lay here, one night the Portuguese who were left in the captured brig murdered the Ladrones that were on board of her, cut the cables, and fortunately escaped through the darkness of the night. And as for the schooner, it was I who cut her cable, and it was I  that killed the men you had aboard of her, and it was I who brought her  where youll never see her more, not one of you. She received the ransom and left the Antelope just before dark.

 While he was in chase of this vessel a circumstance occurred, which made his men believe he dealt with the devil; his fore and main topmast being carried away, he, Lewis, running up the shrouds to the maintop, tore off a handful of hair, and throwing it into the air used this expression, good devil, take this till I come. She appeared to be a vessel of about thirty tons; her hold was filled with straw and wood, and there were a few small boxes of combustibles on her deck, which exploded alongside of us without doing any damage. And now you are to choose, and you may lay to that, said Silver. Then sent the boat on board for the other two men, being five in all; who came ashore, and rejoiced enough was I to see among them Thomas Young, one of my crew, who was detained on board the Mexican, but had escaped through Nickolas means; the other a Frenchman, named John Cadedt. I stood straight up against the wall,  my heart still going like a sledgehammer, but with a ray of hope  now shining in my bosom. The door opened, and the five men, standing huddled together just  inside, pushed one of their number forward. The seacook instantly removed his pipe. The parrot sat, preening her plumage, on Long Johns shoulder.

 She anchored off Quallah Battoo in February 1832, disguised as a Danish ship, and came to in merchantman style, a few men being sent aloft, dressed in red and blue flannel shirts, and one sail being clewed up and furled at a time. While with us he gave me a letter written in great haste, which contains some particulars respecting the cargo;as follows:  January 4th, 1822. While passing our solitary island, they laughed at our misery, which was almost insupportablelooking upon us as though we had committed some heinous crime, and they had not sufficiently punished us; they hallooed to us, crying out Captain, Captain, accompanied with obscene motions and words, with which I shall not blacken these pagesyet I heard no check upon such conduct, nor could I expect it among such a gang, who have no idea of subordination on board, except when in chase of vessels, and even then but very little. It was as plain as day. Then they ordered Captain Orgamar to leave his vessel, allowing him his trunk and turned him ashore, to seek for himself.

 And then, in  his first gracious tones, he replied to me, Yesterday morning, Mr. The sixth had only risen  upon his elbow; he was deadly pale, and the bloodstained bandage round  his head told that he had recently been wounded, and still more recently  dressed. And so,  Jimstopping the tobaccohere you were, and quite a pleasant  surprise for poor old John. Its a black  conscience that can make you feared of me. I stood hazing long enough from one, added another. And thereupon he sat down across the brandy cask and began to fill a  pipe. he cried. It was so decided; loaded pistols were served out to all the sure men;  Hunter, Joyce, and Redruth were taken into our confidence and received  the news with less surprise and a better spirit than we had looked for,  and then the captain went on deck and addressed the crew.

 The pirates were in  possession of the house and stores: there was the cask of cognac,  there were the pork and bread, as before, and what tenfold increased  my horror, not a sign of any prisoner. I stopped, for, I tell you, I was out of breath, and to my wonder, not  a man of them moved, but all sat staring at me like as many sheep. Its not Flints ship, and Flint is dead; but Ill tell you true, as  you ask methere are some of Flints hands aboard; worse luck for the  rest of us. Its the custom, sir, he added apologetically.

 It would be pleasanter to come to blows. He had found a longish firtree  lying felled and trimmed in the enclosure, and with the help of Hunter  he had set it up at the corner of the loghouse where the trunks crossed  and made an angle. She gave Davis a broadside, and killed nine of his men; a desperate engagement ensued, which continued from one oclock at noon until nine next morning, when the Dutchman struck. Its  a main cold morning, to be sure, sir, to sit outside upon the sand. I never seen a pack o fools look  fishier; and you may lay to that, if I tells you that looked the  fishiest. Then Teach went into the tender with forty hands, and upon a sandy island, about a league from shore, where there was neither bird no beast, nor herb for their subsistence, he left seventeen of his crew, who must inevitably have perished, had not Major Bonnet received intelligence of their miserable situation, and sent a longboat for them. He had lain like  a Trojan behind his mattress in the gallery; he had followed every order  silently, doggedly, and well; he was the oldest of our party by a score  of years; and now, sullen, old, serviceable servant, it was he that was  to die. She kept on to the eastward about ten or fifteen minutes after we had tacked, then wore round, set square sail, steering directly for us, came down upon us very fast, and was soon within gun shot of us, fired a gun and hoisted patriot colors and backed main topsail. And one of the men left the loghouse and presently returned with a  lighted brand. She had great sweetness of disposition and ingenuousness.

 I asked with a very tremulous voice. The seacry of the watch, that beautiful Alls  well, never fell more reassuringly on my ear. He looked to the priming of his gun. It is for you to speak, says Mr. Its your own doing. Its a bargain! Its us must break the treaty when the time  comes; and till then Ill gammon that doctor, if I have to ile his boots  with brandy. He caught the painter and made it fast, and we fell to  loading the boat for our very lives.

 I dont say nothing as to your being in our hands, continued Silver,  though there you are, and you may lay to it. he broke out. he added with a look of great shrewdness. The dusk  had come nigh hand completely, and as I opened out the cleft between the  two peaks, I became aware of a wavering glow against the sky, where, as  I judged, the man of the island was cooking his supper before a roaring  fire. The wood was pretty  open, and keeping along the lower spurs, I had soon turned the corner  of that hill, and not long after waded to the midcalf across the  watercourse. Its childs play to find the stuff now. He heard me with the keenest interest, and when I had done he  patted me on the head. She was at this time just fifteen, and ripening into that slight fullness of form, and roundness of limb, which in that climate mark the early passing from girl into woman. It were, said the cook; it were when we weighed anchor. I turned to run, struck violently against one person, recoiled, and ran  full into the arms of a second, who for his part closed upon and held me  tight.

 He was still holding me by the wrist, and at that he give it quite a  wring. he asked. she was with her parents a passenger on board a Dutch ship, bound from Curracoa to Holland; there were a number of other passengers, male and female, on board, all of whom except the young lady abovementioned were put to death; her unfortunate parents were inhumanly butchered before her eyes, and she was doomed to witness the agonies and to hear the expiring, heartpiercing groans of those whom she held most dear, and on whom she depended for protection! Then he ordered them all ashore. She accordingly gave them all chase, and coming up with the brig, the Arabs took to their boats and abandoned her. My second is a  piece of advice: keep the boy close beside you, and when you need help,  halloo.

 And then, all of a sudden, a shrill voice broke forth out of the  darkness:    Pieces of eight! She was one of the Great Moguls own ships, and there were in her several of the greatest persons in his court, among whom, it was said, was one of his daughters going upon a pilgrimage to Mecca; and they were carrying with them rich offerings to present at the shrine of Mahomet. Marys Island in safety. And I put the helm hard up,  and the HISPANIOLA swung round rapidly and ran stem on for the low,  wooded shore. Then Lewis sent on board him, and ordered the master into his sloop. I had no time left me to recover. The water scarcely reached my waist; the sand was  firm and covered with ripple marks, and I waded ashore in great spirits,  leaving the HISPANIOLA on her side, with her mainsail trailing wide  upon the surface of the bay. I should lie down in my own  place (I thought with a silent chuckle) and enjoy their faces when they  found me in the morning. I stole round by the eastern end, keeping close in shadow, and at a  convenient place, where the darkness was thickest, crossed the palisade. She sustained his attacks with great courage and talent; but during a severe action in the gulf of Finland, Alf boarded her vessel, and having killed the greatest part of her crew, seized the captain, namely herself; whom nevertheless he knew not, because she had a casque which covered her visage. The  peak dropped instantly, a great belly of loose canvas floated broad upon  the water, and since, pull as I liked, I could not budge the downhall,  that was the extent of what I could accomplish.

 And now, boy, you stand by. Then one of them struck the union flag on the top of the castle, which the men from the vessel perceiving, rushed to the combat, and in an instant were in possession of the castle, without tumult or bloodshed. It was a master surgeon, him that ampytated meout of  college and allLatin by the bucket, and what not; but he was hanged  like a dog, and sundried like the rest, at Corso Castle. Its Flint, by ! It was Silvers voice, and before I had heard a dozen words, I would  not have shown myself for all the world, but lay there, trembling and  listening, in the extreme of fear and curiosity, for from these dozen  words I understood that the lives of all the honest men aboard depended  upon me alone.

 I stopped, with much wonder in my heart, and perhaps a little terror  also. The jibs I speedily doused and  brought tumbling to the deck, but the mainsail was a harder matter. The evening breeze had sprung up, and  though it was well warded off by the hill with the two peaks upon the  east, the cordage had begun to sing a little softly to itself and the  idle sails to rattle to and fro. I had nothing  nearer my fancy than to get home to the stockade and boast of my  achievements. It was something to see him wedge the  foot of the crutch against a bulkhead, and propped against it, yielding  to every movement of the ship, get on with his cooking like someone safe  ashore. Then he told the Frenchman that he must pass for captain, and by, says he, you are the captain; the Frenchman durst not refuse doing as he would have him. I scrambled forward and looked over. he asked.

 The blood ran down the  faster, to be sure, but I was my own master again and only tacked to the  mast by my coat and shirt. She then struck her colors. Benavides, though unquestionably a ferocious savage, was, nevertheless, a man of resource, full of activity, and of considerable energy of character. While setting here, the sun was so powerful and oppressive, reflecting its rays upon the sea, which was then calm, and the white sand which dazzled the eye, was so painful, that we retired under the awning; there the moschetoes and flies were so numerous, that good rest could not be found. It had  been originally meant that the captain, Mr. I thought  this made it still more dangerous; yet the strain was so heavy that I  half feared to meddle. While he remains at Algiers he and his family shall be under the protection of the commanderinchief. While I was still in this delightful dream, we came suddenly in front  of a large inn and met Squire Trelawney, all dressed out like a  seaofficer, in stout blue cloth, coming out of the door with a smile on  his face and a capital imitation of a sailors walk. He was clothed with tatters  of old ships canvas and old seacloth, and this extraordinary patchwork  was all held together by a system of the most various and incongruous  fastenings, brass buttons, bits of stick, and loops of tarry gaskin. She proved to be the armed schooner Gen. Wheres Flints?

 The dirk,  where it had pinned my shoulder to the mast, seemed to burn like a hot  iron; yet it was not so much these real sufferings that distressed me,  for these, it seemed to me, I could bear without a murmur; it was the  horror I had upon my mind of falling from the crosstrees into that  still green water, beside the body of the coxswain. And I went  back to my meal with a good appetite. Then he went to a place called Porca, where he watered his ship and bought a number of hogs of the natives to victual his company. She fired a gun at a vessel about to enter, and forced her to run aground; she then tacked and shortly after came to an anchor at the entrance of the pass. But this was not all. I was now alone upon the ship; the tide had just turned. She was a very rich prize, laden with sugar, skins, and tobacco, with four thousand moidores of gold, besides other valuable articles. After that, we kept under cover of the bulwarks, and when next I looked  out they had disappeared from the spit, and the spit itself had almost  melted out of sight in the growing distance. then ordered me to come on board in my boat.

 And again dodging the boom, I ran to the colour lines, handed down their  cursed black flag, and chucked it overboard. And where mought you have come from? And if  so, where were the men? It was       the crew that troubled me.

 She was commanded by Don Pedro Gilbert, a native of Catalonia, in Spain, and son of a grandee; a man thirtysix years of age, and exceeding handsome, having a round face, pearly teeth, round forehead, and full black eyes, with beautiful raven hair, and a great favorite with the ladies. He was concealed by this time behind another tree trunk; but he must  have been watching me closely, for as soon as I began to move in his  direction he reappeared and took a step to meet me. I was no sooner certain of this than I began to feel sick, faint, and  terrified. And I had hardly  moved before the boat, giving up at once her gentle dancing movement,  ran straight down a slope of water so steep that it made me giddy, and  struck her nose, with a spout of spray, deep into the side of the next  wave.

 It  contained two thingsa book and a sealed paper. It will amount to this: If we have the  clue you talk about, I fit out a ship in Bristol dock, and take you and  Hawkins here along, and Ill have that treasure if I search a year. While I was still casting about in my  thoughts to find some probable excuse, Dr. The hammer fell, but there followed neither flash nor sound;  the priming was useless with seawater. Then giving the Bristol galley to the Frenchman, they sailed in quest of new adventures, and soon took several prizes, and out of them increased the number of their own hands. Indeed, on a second glance, it seemed impossible to fancy that the body  was in a natural position. She replied, St. It was not yet seven, she said, by a long way; she  knew her rights and she would have them; and she was still arguing with  me when a little low whistle sounded a good way off upon the hill. And when, at last,  I shouldered the coracle and groped my way stumblingly out of the hollow  where I had supped, there were but two points visible on the whole  anchorage.

 And yet, in this breath of time, the fight was  over and the victory was ours. I could see by the working of his face that he was  trying to think, and the process was so slow and laborious that, in my  newfound security, I laughed aloud. And how many on yours, Mr. The  tides made good enough by now. He whipped out of sight  in a moment, leaving Silver to arrange the party, and I fancy it was as  well he did so. The  whole story was a pretext. While I was thus looking and wondering, in a calm moment, when the ship  was still, Israel Hands turned partly round and with a low moan writhed  himself back to the position in which I had seen him first. She had left the pleasant harbor of Salem, Mass. she was about two miles right to windward of us; could perceive a large number of men upon her deck, and one man on the fore top gallant yard looking out; was very suspicious of her, but knew not how to avoid her. Then entering St. She ran along to windward of us, hailed us to know where we were from, where bound, &c.

 He  fairly outstripped himself in willingness and civility; he was all  smiles to everyone. I placed my palms against the mainmast, which was of a goodish bigness,  and waited, every nerve upon the stretch. It was a long, difficult business, for the coins were of all countries  and sizesdoubloons, and louis dors, and guineas, and pieces of eight,  and I know not what besides, all shaken together at random. I spoke with a little heat, thinking of the bloody dirk he had hidden  in his pocket and designed, in his ill thoughts, to end me with. he added, breaking off. It was like any other seamans chest on the outside, the initial B  burned on the top of it with a hot iron, and the corners somewhat  smashed and broken as by long, rough usage. And then, as we all slunk back to our places,  Gray, he said, Ill put your name in the log; youve stood by your  duty like a seaman.

 She was a low strait schooner of about one hundred and fifty tons, painted black with a narrow white streak, a large head with the horn of plenty painted white, large maintopmast but no yards or sail on it. Then ensued a battle; they attacked each other with guns and stones, and many people were killed and wounded. Then he brought the sloop alongside, put every thing on board the ship, and sunk the sloop. It was already candlelight when we reached the hamlet, and I shall  never forget how much I was cheered to see the yellow shine in doors and  windows; but that, as it proved, was the best of the help we were likely  to get in that quarter. Then would the O he oh, on its discharging, have been a delightful sound to me. He was the flower of the flock, was  Flint! And I hoperaising his voicethat all hands in this here  block house will overhaul my words, for what is spoke to one is spoke to  all. The coxswain told me how to lay the ship to; after a good many  trials I succeeded, and we both sat in silence over another meal. He had a way of talking  to each and doing everybody some particular service.

 She proved to be a very rich prize, having on board the Governor of Acra, with all his substance, going to Holland. And he filled a pipe and lighted it; and the two men sat silently  smoking for quite a while, now looking each other in the face, now  stopping their tobacco, now leaning forward to spit. She kept along the coast and made several prizes, French and English, and put into a harbor where a French ship lay making fish. She was called the Pearl of Jamaica, and got under sail at the sight of them; but the pirate sloops coming near Rowland, and showing no colors, he gave them a gun or two, whereupon they hoisted the black flag, and fired three guns each at the Pearl. I said. It was the second death I had known, and  the sorrow of the first was still fresh in my heart. And the captain looked at him calmly and proceeded to fill a pipe. He had a line or two rigged up to help him across the  widest spacesLong Johns earrings, they were called; and he would hand  himself from one place to another, now using the crutch, now trailing it  alongside by the lanyard, as quickly as another man could walk. The breeze served us admirably.

 Then retired for rest and sleep, but realized little of either. I was prompt with my answer, however, for I saw where  my advantage lay and that with a fellow so densely stupid I could easily  conceal my suspicions to the end. I cant hit the name on t;  well, you get me a bottle of wine, Jimthis here brandys too strong  for my head. Then they insisted on fighting, and said if I would not help them, I was no friend. He was a great confidant of Long John Silver, and so the mention of  his name leads me on to speak of our ships cook, Barbecue, as the men  called him. She soon, however, came near enough to anchor, and her boat pushed off towards us with three men in her. I never seen sich dirty luck, not I. The floor  was thick with mud where ruffians had sat down to drink or consult after  wading in the marshes round their camp.

 The moan,  which told of pain and deadly weakness, and the way in which his jaw  hung open went right to my heart. It was some time before either I or the captain seemed to gather our  senses, but at length, and about at the same moment, I released his  wrist, which I was still holding, and he drew in his hand and looked  sharply into the palm. then notorious pirates, and by them known to be so, they all received sentence of death, and were executed on the 17th of February at Gallows Point at Port Royal. It was one January morning, very earlya pinching, frosty morningthe  cove all grey with hoarfrost, the ripple lapping softly on the stones,  the sun still low and only touching the hilltops and shining far to  seaward. It was a bitter cold winter, with long, hard  frosts and heavy gales; and it was plain from the first that my poor  father was little likely to see the spring. He had no command among the men, and people did what they  pleased with him. I aint  particlar as a rule, and I dont take no blame for settling his hash,  but I dont reckon him ornamental now, do you? Then the depositions that had been given against the other prisoners were repeated, upon which he was convicted, and received the sentence of death accordingly, which he suffered in company with Captain Weaver and William Ingham.

 Then followed a battle of looks between them, but the captain soon  knuckled under, put up his weapon, and resumed his seat, grumbling like  a beaten dog. He and the squire were very thick and friendly, but I soon  observed that things were not the same between Mr. The jibs behind me  cracked aloud, the rudder slammed to, the whole ship gave a sickening  heave and shudder, and at the same moment the mainboom swung inboard,  the sheet groaning in the blocks, and showed me the lee afterdeck. She was a sloop from Jamaica, of about twelve tons, with a cargo of rum and wine, bound to Trinidad. Then all of a sudden there was a tremendous explosion of oaths and  other noisesthe chair and table went over in a lump, a clash of steel  followed, and then a cry of pain, and the next instant I saw Black  Dog in full flight, and the captain hotly pursuing, both with drawn  cutlasses, and the former streaming blood from the left shoulder. he said at last, wiping his  cheeks. I had now  plenty of water and good things to eat, and my conscience, which had  smitten me hard for my desertion, was quieted by the great conquest I  had made.

 She was commanded by the notorious Diableto or Little Devil. It may, indeed, be wondered at that he and his Janissaries should be allowed to retain all their illgotten booty, under the name of private property; but Count de Bourmont, though not without talent, was essentially a weak man, and was in this instance overreached by the wily Moor. The planks, which had not been swabbed since  the mutiny, bore the print of many feet, and an empty bottle, broken by  the neck, tumbled to and fro like a live thing in the scuppers. She married a young sailor without a shilling. And we  could hear him adding to himself, Capn, is it? I mean to get into North Inlet and beach her quietly there. he burst out. I walked aft until I reached the mainmast. And what do you want with your flag of truce? Then he  passed his hand over his eyes several times and at last turned back into  the house.

 Then well see. The  schooner trembled to her keel under the reverse, but next moment, the  other sails still drawing, the jib flapped back again and hung idle. It amounted in the English fleet, to one hundred and twentyeight men killed, and six hundred and ninety wounded; in the Dutch squadron, to thirteen killed, and fiftytwo wounded; grand total, eight hundred and eightythree. She knew that her husbands mother was in good circumstances, and could easily support her child, provided she could make her pass for a boy, and her sons child.

 I was on the lee side of the forecastle, and the mainsail, which was  still drawing, concealed from me a certain portion of the afterdeck. Then it was that there came into my head the first of the mad notions  that contributed so much to save our lives. I had scarce time to  thinkscarce time to act and save myself. The bowsprit was  over my head. I was not a hundred yards from her when the wind came again in a clap;  she filled on the port tack and was off again, stooping and skimming  like a swallow. I have said this was  the worst thing possible for me, for helpless as she looked in this  situation, with the canvas cracking like cannon and the blocks trundling  and banging on the deck, she still continued to run away from me, not  only with the speed of the current, but by the whole amount of her  leeway, which was naturally great. She accordingly quitted that service, and enlisted into a regiment of horse; there she behaved herself so valiantly, that she gained the esteem of all her officers. I was now gaining rapidly on the schooner; I could see the brass glisten  on the tiller as it banged about, and still no soul appeared upon her  decks. Then he hesitated,  drew back, came forward again, and at last, to my wonder and  confusion, threw himself on his knees and held out his clasped hands in  supplication. He should run him down, hand over hand, by  the powers!

 She obtained permission to take her little daughter with her. It was by their fire that all the ships in the port (with the exception of the outer frigate already mentioned) were in flames, which, extending rapidly over the whole arsenal, gunboats, and storehouses, exhibited a spectacle of awful grandeur and interest which no pen can describe. I could see the cool green treetops swaying together  in the breeze, and I felt sure I should make the next promontory without  fail. He was one of them. She went therefore prepared to accept of anything short of these sufferings. The breeze fell for some seconds,  very low, and the current gradually turning her, the HISPANIOLA revolved  slowly round her centre and at last presented me her stern, with the  cabin window still gaping open and the lamp over the table still burning  on into the day. Then I skirted among the woods until I had regained the rear, or  shoreward side, of the stockade, and was soon warmly welcomed by the  faithful party. The current was bearing coracle and schooner southward at an equal rate.