#Chapter 2: Vikings



 Behold Osla, Queen of  Sogn! she whispered. she cried. Let us wake the knave, and ask him, said Helgi; and suiting the  action to the word, he drove one foot sufficiently hard into the  sleepers side to rouse him with a start. Then Thord the Tall is dead? It was an ill deed, said Estein. And that she cried in astonishment. I was banished for mine  own fault, thenceforth Thord exiled me for his. Let them drink,  let them drink. Next day the old man was more silent and reserved than before, but  every now and then Estein saw that his eyes followed him, and the  few words he spoke were couched in a kindlier manner. While Thorar was still going down the room, Estein,  with a deliberately clumsy movement, upset and extinguished the  one nearest him.

 He took the bag, weighed it in his hand, and answered slowly,    This is a small atonement for a brothers death. While the King of Sweden and his forces were engaged with their attack  upon Olafs centre of battle, Earl Erik adopted a plan which, although  seemingly more hopeless, was in the end more successful than any that  had yet been attempted by either the Danes or the Swedes. It was a fine starlight night, and down below he could see the  glimmer of the sea, and across the fiord the black outline of the  hills, and nearer at hand he heard the sough of the night breeze  in the pines. Let us hear how the men of Liot will sing when they are warm. The writing gave me the direction of one who knew where he could  be found, and so I travelled to a far countryJemtland it is,  many days from Sogn. Its people  were more barbarous than the Norwegians, and had long been in a  state of halfsubjection to the Norse kings. The girl paused for a moment as if to collect her  thoughts, and then she said,    You had a brother, King EsteinOlaf Hakonson    She stopped again, and seemed to look hesitatingly at him. The girl seemed to start a little, and then she said in a low  voice,    Are you King Estein?

 And now you seek me? It is hard, Helgi, to lose at  once both a father and a fathers regard. Let  us seek Liot wherever he is, and when we have found him, tell him  to arm as many men as he can muster. It all  comes to this: the purposes of the gods are too deep for me to  fathom, so I must een hold my peace and bide the passage of  events.

 The smile died quickly from his face as he walked down the hall,  and men noticed that he looked grave and preoccupied again. Its wings and body were perfectly black. It was on a breezy April morning that the mountains of Sogn came  into view again. I have seen him, he answered evasively. It was even so. While the Danes were in full retreat the  Swedes hastened forward to renew the attack. It is strange indeed, replied Estein, thoughtfully. Then run your thoughts still on this maiden? I ask your pardon, Mistress Osla. Then since I need no revenge, let the slaying cease, said  Estein, though in truth the treacherous dogs ill deserve mercy. And he left me a  writingfor he had taught me the art of reading on the islandand  with it much silver, or at least it seemed much to me.

 It was about midday, when, as they were coming down a wooded  slope, Helgi exclaimed,    Hark! And tell her, added Helgi as the birdman turned away, that  here sits the kings fosterbrother, a most proper person at all  times to hear a maidens tale, and now most persuasively charged  with ale. While King Sweyn  crossed to the opposite side of the stream and led an attack upon  Southwark, Olaf effected a landing near Billings Gate and directed all  his strength upon the wall. She will not tell her business, he said, but begs earnestly to  see the king. He is called Atli, now, she replied, but    Atli, a brother of Thord the Tall! Then he came up to the girl and said,    Thy chamber is ready for thee.

 Next he felt that he was very wet  and cold; and then he discovered that he was not alone. And now for a horn of ale, and then to bed, responded Helgi,  cheerful as ever again. He lived in the island, she went on, for many years, all alone  save for me. While Sigurd was speaking, Olafs eyes rested upon the queen. Then came a brief pause in the hostilities, and, looking round the  edge of his fort, Estein could see his foe standing motionless  close under a tree. He was the enemy  of your family, but a lenderman  of high  birth, and a good and noble man. she asked. She looked at him with some surprise, and just a sufficient touch  of dignity to check the dash of his advances. and  then again, Trolls take me, if this be not enough to make a bear  laugh!

 Then the faroff howl of a wolf struck dismally on his ear. he cried. Next he  killed his brother Biorn, because he refused to pay him homage and  tribute. While these words were being spoken, Queen Allogias eyes rested upon  Olaf Triggvison, who was acting as cup bearer to his uncle Sigurd. So were we left here in this town. I have heard of them, said Estein, half to himself. she answered. he  would cry, or A shrewd scheme, by the hammer of Thor! While Sigurd was dealing with the people concerning the kings  business, Olaf Triggvison went about from place to place in quest of  tidings of Queen Astrid. she said softly, father! He is but young and  foolish.

 He at least died well, said Helgi; when my turn comes may it be  my luck to look as proudly on my foes. It is highly befitting, she said, more soberly and a  little shyly. Let fate do  with me what it will. While Olaf was in Halogaland he deemed it well to sail yet farther  north; so he fared out to the Lafoden Isles, and thence along the  coasts of Finmark as far even as the North Cape. And yet you sail to Orkney? she whispered.

 he cried, drawing his dagger and springing  forward, never more    As he spoke, Estein, who stood between them, had just time to  throw out one foot and bring the Jemtlander flat on his face, his  dagger flying from his hand. THE END OF THE STORY. He is a certain trader from Norway, whom men call Estein, said  Atli, still looking at her curiously. Let her prow and not her stern stand  out. It was  repeated twice, and then he heard Jomar rise with much growling,  and go softly across the floor. Let us still  wait. She held his great hand in both of hers, and pressed it against  her lips, and in a broken voice she said,    No, not tonight, not tonight.

 She was in the presence of something so mysterious that  even wise men in those days shrank from it in fear. he said to himself, with a start of  excitement. The hall was brightly lit  and gaily hung with tapestries and cloths, rich and manycoloured,  and men bravely dressed poured into their places all down the long  rows of benches. It was a wise inquiry, and the answer was  such as an entirely sober man might have reasonably expected. While I slept,  it seemed to me that I saw you standing at the brink of a deep well of  water. While Kolbiorn and others of Olafs stem  defenders kept up an incessant battle with their javelins and swords,  King Olaf and his archers shot their arrows high in air so that they  fell in thick rain upon the Danish decks.

 She turned his questions as best she could, and strove to make him  think of other things. The next day was spent in preparations for the solemn ceremonies  of pyre and mound, and the great feast which should mark the  reigning of another king in Sogn. she said gently. And whither were you sailing? I shall press his claims myself, said Estein, rising from his  seat. The  time for action is at hand, and we shall see what new freak  fortune will play with me. The burly captain frowned and scratched his head, as though  deliberating how to do a thing so foreign to his genius as the  telling of a narrative. Then he saw that in his curiosity he had  stepped outside the shelter of the wood and stood in a space  between the trees. She tried to rouse him, but he answered only in absent  monosyllables. Let him pass on! It took them but a short  space to find the dead sentinel; and thereupon Thorar, who seemed  almost beside himself with anger, sent the others off in haste to  intercept our road to Ketill, while he himself ran to collect a  force from the village.

 The  fools should have fallen on Ketill that very night. It would seem so,  indeed, I replied, and thereupon ran him through with my blade  and opened the gate. I have a message for the king, replied the man. And  with that I bound him firmly to a tree, and left him to think upon  his misdeeds. He had nothing for it but to equip  me with this great sheepskin coat and cap, and a stout bow and  sheaf of arrows; and then, after a most kindly parting with his  goodwife, I made him set me on my way to Ketill. She walked slowly to the windswept cells.

 And with that he took his shield from  his back. She  brought me to the abode of her father, the hermit of the Holy  Isle; and there I learned to love her. It seemed strangely still and fresh in the open glade. While the vikings were at this work a constant rain of arrows and  javelins was showered upon them by King Olaf himself and his marksmen  on the poop, and as Erik saw his best men falling he half repented  having taken them from the fight. Let him first prove his worthiness by some act of prowess. He was clad in a loose and almost  grotesquely illfitting garment, seemingly of sheepskin, and held  an arrow on his bow ready to shoot on a sign of movement. And now to sleep. It is she or her spirit, he exclaimed. It had been so dark and their flight so hurried that nothing  remained in his memory of the night before, to show him whither  the way was leading.

 I could name one fair maid, said Helgi, glancing at the king,  but in Esteins eye he saw a warning look. She is no witch, Helgi, only the fairest girl in all the North. It  landed on its point and sunk almost out of sight in the snow. I saw your  mother married, Estein, and a fair maid she was. Then I came to Jemtland, where cunning men were said to  live. Then in a brisker tone he continued,    For some years I sailed the west seas; but I was growing old and  my strength was wearing away with the wet work and the fighting,  so I hied me home again. And certainly there was noise enough to be  heard. he wondered. she said, looking up, and he saw that her  eyes were filled with tears. It was nearly noon when he awoke, and the sun was streaming  through the attic window.

 The attack is made, cried Helgi. And what compensation does the king intend to make? He shoots too well, muttered Estein. I will yet keep my promise to thee!

 Then why came you not to my fathers house? She turned her face away. I know not his name, but treachery, he said, was determined; and  I stopped all drink thereafter, and there was nothing at all left  then but to play with dice and sleep. He could only see her  back as she talked with the men, but every gesture she made,  slight though they were, brought sharply and clearly before his  mind memories of the Holy Isle. He had been in  two minds about taking this last, but ere the day was done he had  reason to congratulate himself that it was with him. I will warrant your doings will make me laugh rather than envy,  said Ketill. he inquired with some wonder; what then have you to do  with me? she asked.

 And when the fit  passed away he was quieter than ever. The old man remained lost in thought. And so the days went by; summer changed to autumn, and autumn gave  place to winter. While he spoke Oslas gaze was fixed on the turning tide, but her  eyes, had he seen them, were lit by the fire of his words. she said, more softly than he had ever heard  her speak before. It all came true then? Then he turned to Estein and said,    When I saw thee by the shore at Hernersfiord, now some two years  gone, didst thou think then that Atli was a stranger? It was another Estein whom you saw before. Then unquiet  rumours reached mine ears; for though I live apart from men here  in this forest, little passes in the countryay, and in Norway  toothat comes not to Atlis knowledge. And Vandrad, the searover, had gone with the sunshinehad gone,  never so Osla said to herself, to return again. It was  too late to turn back, even had his pride allowed him to think of  taking such a course.

 Let them all be set free, ordered the earl. The girl at once left the fire, and followed him back to the other  room. She  seemed merely friendly, and he was distracted between a wild  desire to break down the barriers between them and a strange and  numbing feeling of warning that held him back, he knew not why. Let none of the blood fall upon my hair! Let us leave him and go our  ways without him. Estein stood like a man struck dumb, and then muttering, I will  join you again, he started quickly up the pier, and was shortly  lost to view in the darkness. Then he turned back and answered,    The gods curse you and him! While he lived I always told  myself that I would find some way even yet by which I might fulfil  my promise, but now it is too late. The girls look, as he turned at the foot and faced her, stuck in  his mind for long after. And the spell is broken?

 She threw him one glance that  lived long in his memory, and quickly followed her father. Then with a frown he rose and  walked down the hall. It was done  with neither my knowledge nor consent, and none grieved at such an  outrage more than I. I slew them in the outset of the battle. He was never the man to forgive an injury, he added, apparently  to himself. I had a strange dream last night, replied Helgi. I thought I heard the voice of a girl; but when I woke more  fully, it was gone, indeed. Let the boy be given up to him, then, said the king; for he has won  him very fairly. Then Ketill shall stay here with the rest of our troop, and you  and I, with twenty more, will to the king.

 Let me see him that I may tell him  to his face that he is a coward! She  sprang to her feet as he finished, and said,    I, too, have the Norse blood in me; the sea calls me as it calls  you; and if I were a man, I fear I should make a bad hermit. The Viking had not been watching very long when the girls voice  rose a little as she said something earnestly, and Atli, with a  slight movement and a warning frown, glanced up at the loft and  pointed with one finger straight at where Helgi lay. Let it be so by all means if you so wish it, answered the earl in a  light tone of unconcern. Then Ketills gruff voice called  out,    After him! Then Osla started, and her heart smote her. Then all went outside the circle, and with a shout Liot sprang at  his foe. And the hermit? Then you have spared Olafs burner for the sake of the burners  daughter?

 Then I bethought me it were well  to have a burning, if it were only of a long ship; so we kindled  three great fires, one for each vessel, and if the men of Liot  feel cold tonight, it will not be my fault. Then you set them on fire? Then  the crowd on shore set off for their ships. She had milked their  solitary cow, baked cakes enough for the days fare, and now, her  simple housekeeping over, she was free to entertain her guest. Let me be your pilot, for I know all the  deepest channels between the isles, and I will lead you through them by  such ways that you will come out far in advance of your other ships! And his hands were tied by a stronger  chain. She smiled, and her smile was one of those that illuminate a face. He sat down on a bench as he spoke and gazed into the fire. It seemed to him to have  an almost supernatural import, and again he said to himself, An  old man, a maiden, and a spell.

 she cried decidedly; it will be time enough to talk of  gifts when I have earned them. And so the time passed away, till Estein had spent six weeks in  the Holy Isle. It fell wet and  gusty at night, and Osla, bending over the couch, could hear  nothing but the wind and the roost she knew so well. she asked. He found himself in a room that seemed to occupy most of the small  house. I shall say nothing to any one, Helgi answered more soberly. It is more fitting, replied Helgi, for the man who comes back  to be cheerful. And I have to thank your daughter that I am not there now,  Estein added.

 She rode easy upon the waves, both before and against  the wind, and Olaf was well pleased. She therefore accepted Forkbeards proposals, and they were wedded in  accordance with the rites and customs of their pagan faith. He added the last words with a touch of irony that hardly tended  to propitiate his guest. it was a song I sung myself. I have  only just arrived. It was easy to see that. he exclaimed. she cried.

 She  was the widow of King Erik the Victorious and the mother of King Olaf  the Swede. It was about two hours after midnight when the long ship, stealing  under the shadow of the cliffs, turned into a small bay. The door closed, the party seemed to go away, and then whispering  began in the room below him. Then he saw that he  had only to deal with a halfawakened drinker, and as his mouth  was framing a question, Grims dagger flashed, and with a cry the  man fell heavily on the floor. It will take us full two hours to reach the bay where Liot  dwells, and the feast, I fear, will have ended even now, for the  hour is late. THE MIDNIGHT GUEST.

 She stepped back a pace, so that the moonlight, falling upon him, might  show her where to strike. It was a stern and sombre coast, unbroken by any bays or inland  glimpses, and gloomy and terrible in the fading light. she murmured; and her voice sounded  through the hail like the soughing of the wintry wind among the pines. She stood over him,  holding her hand aloft, ready to strike the fatal blow. It has come true sooner than I  expected. He started off as he spoke, and Estein, perceiving the  hopelessness of further search, followed him with a heart little  lightened. he whispered. She stood before him. She was his daughter Gudrun. I should ask your  pardon. she asked as she took his hand.

 She looked up and beheld two men standing in the shadow of  the trees. I fear my habit pleases not your eye, he said at last, striving  to control his countenance. Let us now go down to our ships and not be too slow in attack. She did not believe that what people said of him was  truethat he was black of heart, and cruel and base. I  shrewdly suspected, from my memory of the way I had come  overnight, that he was leading me back to King Bues hall, and  meant on our parting to put a horde of his rascally fellows in my  way. And I, that I am with an overconfident crew, she answered. Then he placed it against  the wall, and gave one whispered order. And you have five brothers to avenge; the sword should not rust  long in your scabbard, Estein.

 And what is my fate, old man? The door was  open, but it was so pitch black inside that I knew they could not  see me, though them I saw plainly enough as they stopped at the  gate. And yet, Estein, he added in a lower tone, as he embraced him,  I would that Yule were here again and you with it. He could see nothing, and had just stepped forward a pace,  when noiselessly as a phantom a dark form appeared round the  corner of the hall, and without pausing an instant came straight  up to him. He woke with a start, saw that the drink was  coming to an end, and cried with drunken ardour,    More ale, more ale, Thorar!

 He had been placed between Estein and Helgi, and now Estein  was able to lean over to his fosterbrother, and, under pretence  of trying to make him drink, whispered in his ear,    Go out by the far door, and await me outside the court on the  farthest side from the entrance. I laid the man out  under the shadow of the fence, where he could not well be seen  save by such as had more clearness of vision than becomes the  guests of so hospitable a monarch as King Bue, and having stripped  him of his coat and put it round mine own shoulders, I took his  place and awaited your coming. She pursued him far and wide; but the  gods protected him and he escaped. She went nearer to him, lifted up his  hood and looked long and earnestly into his eyes. It is  unlucky to break such spells so rudely. She was the longest ship  that Olaf had ever seen, and he counted that she was fitted for twenty  pairs of oars. Let our cry be Onward,  Christ men; onward, Cross men! Then they  became afraid to row at more than a snails pace, and sometimes  almost stopped altogether.

 Then Liot is alive? she asked. It was dark, but he  seemed to see plainly a figure, wrapped in a long cloak, walking  before him towards the cells. Let us not lose courage at the sight of these heathen devourers of  horse flesh! And then again, as the stir increased, and he could see the men  beginning to troop on board the long ships,    This voyage shall be as the falling of snowflakes into the sea;  but what man can escape his fate? He glanced round the hall now and then, and could see  them quickly succumbing to the Jemtland hospitality. Let us give him food and drink quickly, father. Let us sit here, Osla, he said.

 Then the memory of Thord the Tall, telling of the burning, rose  fresh and strong, and again his hand sought his side, and his  breath came fast, till the vision of Osla swept aside all other  thoughts. I left that hall, accursed of the gods, and over full, I  fear, of drunken men, in the manner you witnessed. And when the word went round that the rescued man was  Kolbiorn Stallare and not the king, the lad pointed outward upon the  sea and all looked in amaze upon the shining crucifix as it rose and  fell with the motion of the waves. And then there came the sound of hurried feet upon the stairs, and  Einar Eindridson rushed upon the upper deck, followed by three of his  shipmates, and pursued by Earl Erik and a great crowd of clamouring  vikings. she cried, throwing down a bag  of coins upon the table. he thought, I have walked into the trap like a child in  arms.

 Let us drown them then, he said. I doubt it not, replied his friend, with a smile; you have the  look of one who is high in favour with himself. The man leaned so heavily upon the gate,  that wake him I must, for I liked not to slay a sleeping man, even  though he stood upon his feet. And as  the weight increased so did the Serpent lean over, until at last her  bulwarks were almost on a level with those of the Iron Ram. He took his seat, and glancing round the hall saw his twenty  followers scattered here and there among the crowd of guests. And now the  Long Serpent lay with only two companions, the Short Serpent at her  starboard and the Crane at her larboard side. She sent a message through the King  of Sweden, asking that she might have Olaf back in Norway to live in  her court, and to be taught and nurtured as behoved one of such exalted  birth. He walked up to his seat by the king,  and on the spur of the moment could hit on no plan of  communicating with his men. I shall have one other shot. She was his evil genius, egging him on  to deeds of treachery and violence which made him detested of all men. he asked.

 And I have been thinking,  ever since this battle began that the great luck of Olaf may be due to  that sign of the cross that we see on all his banners and shields. She was named Gunnhild, and had learned  all kinds of sorcery and witchcraft among the Finns. Then we drove them in and closed the door. I have turned sluggard, it seems, he said. Then they heard us, they smelt the smoke,  and they ran to the doors. I accept the counsel, Atli, he cried, springing to his feet. She was the daughter of King Erik of Hordaland, and King  Harald, hearing that she was exceedingly fair and high minded would  fain have her to be his wife. She went across to the side of the great fireplace, and, seating  herself in one of the large oaken chairs, signed to Sigurd and Olaf to  approach her. I  had read the stars, and talked with divers magicians and men  skilled in the wisdom of things unseen.

 Then all at  once it seemed to flash upon him that this was no mortal visitor,  and with a sudden thrill of fear he stopped. The old seer laid his hand affectionately upon his shoulder. The old man repeated the last words low and slowly, and then, for  a little, silence fell upon the pair. Then he sang his farewell song:    Canst thou spare a sigh, fair Osla? She paused for a moment, then added: I am your  queen, Hersir Sigurd, and I command you to tell me what I ask. Then he said, I am called  Vandrad;  from my youth up I have been a  searover, and I fear I may prove ill suited to your fathers  company. She broke off and turned to Sigurd. It is hard to part, but it must  come some day, and these verses are my parting song. he exclaimed half aloud. The faces of the wizard and  the witch (Esteins look darkened for an instant), I could not  see, but at last, in the still nighttime, there spoke a voice to  me, and I knew it came from the gods.

 He had come, and what was to follow? It  seemed to him a face that appeared and then vanished, and a faroff  voice that whispered a warning in his ear. I could not visit Hakonstad; I could  not even stay in the land of my birth. Then he had a confused recollection of being swept along by an  irresistible current, clinging the while to what he afterwards  found to be a friendly plank, and after that came oblivion.

 She then bade Sigurd call in her bodyguard fully armed to protect the  lad, while she went out into the kings chamber and pleaded with  Valdemar to prevent the shedding of blood. The frosted  roof sparkled in the moonlight, and a thin stream of smoke rose  from a wide chimney at one end, but there was never a ray of light  from door or window to be seen. She  saw the drinking horn tremble in his hand, so that the wine it held  dripped over the silver rim, and fell upon the front of his white  kirtle; and she divined that it was to him that the prophecy referred. I tell thee, Estein, many fair years  lie before thee. And it may be that in this he was right. he said. I have left my truest friend and twenty stout followers  besides in yonder hall. I see thou knewest not where thy way  would lead thee. he pleaded, casting himself on his  knees. The alarm is raised, and neither  you nor Helgi can be found, so perchance he has not yet suffered  for his folly.

 Let us begin by hanging this man, said Ketill, and then fire,  fire through the country! He  had with him Helgi, Ketill, and a picked force; and as he stood on  deck and watched the towering precipices slip by, and the white  clouds drift over their rough rim of pines, his heart beat high. It was the work of  Ulf, captain of the forecastle; and roaring like a bull, the old  Viking followed his stone. Then Estein turned to his men and said,    We are of one mind, are we not? It is ill that a man should die thirsty. she asked. Near at hand a  narrow lake began, and stretched for a mile or two down the  snowfields, and, like the greater lake they had passed, it was frozen  and shining white. Then Estein sails  today? She paused and looked round at Olaf, who stood apart with his  hand caressing the head of a great dog that had risen from before the  fire. There was a minutes silence after he had finished, and then the  king took Osla by the hand and drew her towards the door, saying,    I wish them to see my queen tonight.

 She  was the daughter of Erik Biodaskalli, who dwelt at Ofrestead, in the  Uplands, a mighty man. Of friends and kinsmen I had few left in the land, but I  had long had other thoughts for myself than the tilling of fields  and the emptying of horns at Yule. It is the king! It was amidships that  the toughest fighting went on, and it was here that the larger number  of the defenders met their death. I have waited for thee, Estein.

 And now the battle raged fiercely. It is ill made and cumbrous, and a  figure of the cross will take less room in our stem and bring us more  luck withal. She wore a blue woven mantle ornamented with lace, and under it a  scarlet kirtle with a silver belt. He was sadder and more reserved than of yore, but the king saw  with joy that the gloom was lifting. he said; a strange witchcraft I  fear has been at work.

 I shall overtake you  ere long. It was  not very long ere yet two others followed; and then the Short Serpent  was exposed, even as her four companions had been. He paused, and she pressed his hand the tighter. The man went swiftly up to the paling, and taking an axe from  under his cloak drove it hard into the wood as high above his head  as he could reach. Then Thorfinn caught sight of King Olaf, and at a sign from  the king he lowered his blade and drew back a pace. It is for Christs faith that we fight today. I was not told to risk my life for him.

 It was  only that, taken wholly unawares, he had need to prepare for the coming  battle. he cried. THE HOUSE IN THE FOREST. And his heathen Sweden, I think,  would find it more agreeable to sit at the fireside and lick their  sacrificial bowls than to board the Long Serpent under the rain of our  weapons. I saw it somewhere written in Runes. Let me come tomorrow, she whispered. I see the  glint of the sun on weapons. It is the host of King Sweyn of Denmark, for I  saw the banner on one of the longships, and it was like unto the  banners that Sweyn Fork Beard carried at the time when we were with him  in England.

 It was the ship of Eindrid of Gimsar. It was very large, and the hull timbers  at both bow and stern were plated with thick staves of iron from the  gunwales down to the waterline. The king, a  foolishlooking old man, evidently completely under Thorars influence,  became very soon in a maudlin condition; man after man around them  grew rapidly more and more drunk; and all the time they themselves  were plied with ale so assiduously that their suspicions grew  stronger. He shall have mercy, Osla! He used to sing to me of  war. The smoky flames flashed on snowcovered ground and  wild faces, and the branches of black pines outside, making the  night above seem dark as a great vault. Then Thorstein Oxfoots sword was struck from his hand. He looked at  her doubtfully, and then said,    Where is Vandrad?

 And now, taking the lead, he arrayed his ships in order, with the Short  Serpent and the Crane together in his immediate wake, and his eight  other longships following close behind. The mention of the Runes brought no look of recognition  to Thorars face. Then Olaf strode  back to the lypting deck and once more surveyed the battle from on  high. She approached the steward, and said as he turned to withdraw from the  hall:    I pray you, go on with your lesson, hersir. Ay, replied Ketill, a burial worthy of King Estein, and a royal  feast we shall have to follow it. She was wonderfully skilled in spaedom, and it was  always the custom at yuletide, when the guests assembled in the kings  hall, that his mother was borne in thither and placed in the high seat. It was yet early morning when King Olaf again went on deck. It is not for Christian folk to inquire into  the future. She waited until it came to the turn of those who were younger than  eighteen years, and then she watched with keen eyes.

 Then at fullest speed he bore down upon the  kings outermost dragon, crashed into her side and renewed his  onslaught. The seaking must not stay,     Een for tresses rich as summer      And for smile as bright as May;     But one hope I cannot part from      We may meet again some day! She had heard the turmoil of voices from  without. It was, therefore, a very  natural thing that the earl should go thither also. he wins! she inquired. It seemed that if only for the sake of  domestic peace an expedition to Wendland must soon be brought about.

 It  was that, by reason of her flight from Wendland, she had forfeited all  the possessions that had been reserved as her dowry. It was  very splendidly furnished, with beautifully carved wood and tapestries  of woven silk. He bent all his energies on driving Liot  back on the ring, shifting his ground as fast as his foe, heading  off his attempts to move round, and all the while watching keenly  for an opening. She looked at Olaf as she spoke, and saw the pleading  in his eyes. Then he lashed two spars  together, a long plank crossed with a shorter one, and raised this  rough made crucifix high in the stem of the Iron Ram. It is not  probable that she was very deep in the water; but of this there is no  record. The sun hung high overhead, under foot the snow  crunched pleasantly, and the air was clear and bracinga day to  inspire an adventurer and a skald.

 Then Earl Erik backed out with the Iron Ram, while the  seamen on his other ships cut away the lashings that had bound Olafs  outermost vessel to her neighbour, and drew the conquered craft away  into the rear, leaving the next ship exposed. she asked with anger  in her tone. The old spirit of my  countrymen has died out, he added sadly, and no man dare meet  your force in the field. I shall see first whether he has spoken the truth, answered  Estein. It was I  who did it. She smiled softly on the  boy as she said this. Then Wolf the Red, his standard bearer, whose station was forward in  the bow, mumbled a complaint:    If the Serpent shall lie as far forward as she is longer than your  other ships, then there will be windy weather today in her bows. I  have brought with me Arne the Slim, your scattgatherer in  Jemtland. I took it    He had begun to wander again, but with a last effort he collected  his thoughts and went on,    Open it. She was the  sister of the King of Dublin, in Ireland, and she was considered very  beautiful. It  was they who, two years afterwards, united their forces in the great  sea fight in which Olaf the Glorious lost his life.

 She said: It is a heavy tale to tell. She had been taken off  by a fever, and her death gave Olaf so much sorrow that he found no  more happiness in the home to which she had brought him. Then the king turned to his own ships. It is told that  great Odin once swore on the ring. It was  most beautifully wrought and interwoven with scrolls and circles so  delicate that all wondered how the hand of man could achieve such  perfection. I have burned, I have slain in  battle, I have pillaged towns and devastated cornlands.

 She rose and went to meet him, knowing him for Kark,  Earl Hakons thrall. Then Thorkel Nefja had his oars brought out, and he steered the Short  Serpent round against the stream and went back with all speed to meet  the king. She led him through among the trees to the back of the steadings. She was very rich and possessed many great manors in Sweden  and large landed estates among the islands of the Baltic. It was the face of Gudrun. The man was bound and guarded, and the march was continued. It is our god Thor, answered one of the chieftains. It was a very large and splendid building. And  what is the meaning of your coming back?

 She was fitted with thirtyfour rooms amidships, each room  being divided into two half rooms. The little army came to a halt, and a poorlooking man, clad in a  skin coat, and trembling violently as they dragged him along, was  brought before Estein. He was  opposed, however, by one of the best and most determined swordsmen  in Norway, and Estein as well as any one knew the risk he ran. Then Earl Erik added with a sneer:    Even if Olaf the Glorious had no larger ship than the Short Serpent,  which we now see, methinks Sweyn with all his army of Danes could never  win it from him without aid.

 The alarm has spread, I fear, answered Estein. I seem to have been long  asleep, and now I know that this wakefulness you see is but the  clearness of a man before he dies. It is held as a sacred custom among us that we shall make  sacrifices to our gods, and we now hold that, although you are our  king, you have no power to decide which gods we are to believe in, or  in what manner we shall worship. She felt that,  here in Norway, she had no private wealth of her own such as beseemed a  queen, whereas there were her great estates in Wendland and Denmark,  from which large revenues were due. And now did Sweyn at once understand how greatly he had  been mistaken in what he had expected of King Olafs famous dragonship,  and how much his fancy had fallen short of the reality. And then he went to the ship and planed out all the notches and cuts,  and made the bulwarks so smooth and fair that all who saw what he did  declared that the ship was made far handsomer than she had been before.

 Then the Swedish king took up the dice and  he threw two sixes. And when she had told him all her  trouble he gave her good counsel and a kindly welcome, and said that  she should always have a peaceful dwelling in his realm. I have that on my mind that you must hear  before I die. I go to Norway, replied Estein. I had forgotten Liot, said Estein. I forgot my kinsfolk and my country, forgot all but Osla. I would slay him, Helgi, like a dog, were it not that something  within me bids me ask in this wise the wishes of Odin. It is told that the storm abated  near to the ships while it still roared wildly some distance away from  them. The country,  however, was difficult, so the men marched warily, their arms  ready for instant use, and a sharp watch kept all the time. I will slay Liot Skulison for you; in fair fight if  you will, though I think not he deserves such a chance.

 Then when the earl had gone off to his own ships, Olaf turned to go  below to his cabin. I tell you, my brother, you are under a spell; let us  seek some magician who will cure you, and not rashly look for  death when you are wearied with sleepless nights and black magic. She wept and prayed and pleaded so often that Olafs patience  was well nigh exhausted. It is because  our god, who rules all, has come, and looks on you with keen eyes. It seemed to  her that he had suddenly become a decrepit old man.

 He began to give ground, Estein pressing him hotly, his  blade flashing so fast that men could not follow it. I like not a midnight murder, and Liot and I have not yet decided  who is the better man. It is that you shall follow in pursuit of Earl Hakon and bring him to  his bane. He called for ale and meat, and with the eye of an old  soldier carefully picked his weapons; while the men around him  muttered to each other that Estein was surely fey.

 She could never forget how Olaf had smitten her in the face with his  glove, and from the earliest days of her marriage with King Sweyn she  had constantly and earnestly urged him to wage war against Olaf  Triggvison. Then why should it be for me that you fear? Then Olaf had his fair weather sails hoisted. It was you who,  escaping from Sweden with your mother, were captured by Esthonian  vikings and sold into slavery. The Viking frowned and exclaimed,    Let those laugh who have tested my steel. He found Liot sitting in the waist bound hand and foot.

 I asked if you would follow me. Then Thorberg went to his side, and said he: Be not so wrathful, O  king. And the  husband whom Sigvaldi and Sweyn chose for me was their fatherinlaw,  King Burislaf. He slew your brother, Estein. She looked out upon the bay, and seeing the enormous hostile fleet that  was closing in upon Olafs diminished force she burst into tears.

 I think so, he said at length. The  king at last began to take alarm, and one day he called Earl  Sigvald to him and talked with him alone. The story must now come back to Norway. He was a  moody and fitful old man. She was a  longship, of twenty banks of oars, and her crew were the pick of all  the warmen of Denmark. He woke at last to the  chill of a grey morning and the roll of a Viking ship. he cried; we will row along the shore to meet them. I have come to meet Liot tonight, Estein replied, and turning  away he paced the deck in deep thought. He was right.

 He has had time  enough to tear the long ships plank from plank. The boxyou know the box? And Kolbiorn left Olafs side and went to  meet her. The lingering winter passed at length, and one morning, in the  first freshness of spring, Osla stood without the cell. And although you had twice the wealth that you have and were  yet more glorious than you are, yet never should I obey such a bidding. And she rose and took up the ring he had sent as a gift, which  ere this time her two smiths had repaired.

 And at last he took her hand and swore by the holy  rood that he would be true to her. And she let them break the ring  asunderand lo! It was in the early springtime when he reached Dublin,  and he was not long in learning that Ole was then living at the court  of King Kuaran, his brotherinlaw. I was wrong, Ketill, he said.

 Then into Sigrids eyes there flashed an angry light. Then the bonders thought that the king might easily be persuaded to  adopt their old time customs, and their indignation against him was  appeased. Then he began to speak to the  king and to tell him of things that had happened many hundreds of years  before and of many lands whose very names were strange to the king. The spell of  summer weather had passed from the islands, and in its wake the  wind blew keenly from the north, and the grey clouddrift hurried  low overhead. Then perhaps he would fall into argument  with one of the leading men of the place and show how the God of  christened men was almighty, and how Thor and Odin must therefore be  rejected. Then you will enjoy good  things from me always, as you have done before; so betray me not. And  as a token of his good faith the king had sent her a gift. Then the chieftain called one of the young warriors to him and  questioned him closely concerning Hakon. And it seemed that her messages had the effect that she  wished. And now she deemed that she had at last discovered one  whose magnificence would match with her own. The sun had long been up, but the whole sky was obscured  by light clouds, and there was an early morning feel in the air.

 She spoke in the Norse tongue, but  with a pretty, foreign accent, and she looked so fair and so kind  that thoughts of sirens and mermaids passed through the Vikings  mind. The Vikings cool indifference gave place to the most exuberant  excitement. Then Olaf brought his five ships close in upon him and assailed him  with arrows, killing many of his men as they swam to land. She was silent, and seemed intently plucking sea pinks.

 It was an expedition  greater than any that Brihtnoth had ever met with steel or Ethelred  with gold, and its purpose was one of deliberately planned invasion and  conquest. It was a principle of the Christian faith; said  Cerdic, that men should remember the Sabbath day and keep it holy, that  they should not bow down to graven images, that they should not steal,  nor be covetous, nor do murder, nor bear false witness; that they  should love their enemies and bless those who cursed them. THE VERDICT OF THE SWORD. Then he saw the cloaked  figure of a man steal quickly away into the shadow of the sails. She gave him no time to answer, but rose and ran lightly away. she asked, with a smile. It was the face of his own fellowslave in far  off Esthonia, his companion in Holmgard, his shipmate Egbert, whom he  had believed to be drowned. He was impelled by his creed of morbid fatalism to seek this test,  whereby his fate might be sharply decided. And then they thought of  Ironbeards daughter, Gudrun, and of what a good thing it would be for  them if the king could be made to wed her.

 Then Olaf said, This is indeed the gladdest news that I have heard for  many a long year! The four swimmers stoutly struck out for dear life, to a splashing  accompaniment of darts and stones. I shall make these cravens row. It is but a  matter of endurance, and one good sword, well wielded, is as good as  the strongest gate ever made. He hummed an air, and  leaning against the bulwark awaited the march of events with his  usual careless philosophy. Then it may be that she is already dead? She yielded an instant,  and then suddenly broke free and started away. Then at last he began to  ask many questions concerning the Upland kings, and who of them were  yet alive, and what dominion they had. she said again, and her voice sounded like a sob.

 She saved my life, and that at least I owe her. And yet, said Olaf; it seems to me that he is made of nothing more  strong than wood. It was considered very  important in the early part of a battle that the shield fortress should  not be broken or opened, nor could such a breach be easily effected  except by overpowering strength or stratagem. I shall not lose my ship that you  may the sooner feed the fishes. The boat had got a start by this time; the rowers bent  their backs and made her spring like a live thing, and the still  water rose in oily waves from the bow. He turned away abruptly, and gazed moodily into the fog; while  Ketill, with the look of one who is dealing with a madman, left  the poop. And aloud he said: The god with whom you have threatened us is blind  and deaf and can help neither himself nor others; nor can he move  anywhere from his place unless he be carried.

 Then Thorir took the animal by  its halter and went and stood by the side of the handsome Norseman. It  is told that during this march he came to a certain monastery and asked  for food for his army. He did not trust himself to answer, but turned and hurried to the  boat. Then Olaf wedded Princess Gyda, and went with her to Ireland, and  lived in great happiness for many days.

 And who is the young King Olaf that he has power to fill the heart of  the great Earl Hakon with terror? The pursuers at first either failed to see Ketills party, or  mistook them for their own men, for they continued their headlong  rush straight to the water, firing arrows and darts as they ran. he cried, drawing her towards him. The dogs are sobering, said Helgi. The chamber was dark as a wolfs mouth as he groped  for the bed. She rose and tried to give her thoughts a lighter turn, but the  note of the north wind smote drearily upon her ears, and she left  the seashore with a sigh.

 she said. She  was tall, and seemed young, and her movements, as she held out her  hands to the flames, or half turned to address the old man, had  grace and the marks of good birth. I thought you would leave us little say, Estein, when once you  were aroused, he said. I have lately heard tell of another. he cried, and stopped abruptly. It seems to me, said Kolbiorn, when Olaf had told him of the defeat  of the Jomsvikings, that now with these forty ships that are ours we  might very well fare to Norway, and take vengeance upon Earl Hakon.

 he cried. She seemed to be telling a narrative to Atli, who, with folded  arms and deep attention that sometimes passed into suppressed  emotion, looked intently at her, and frequently broke in with some  whispered question. He stood out clearly in the transparent  duska tall, mailclad figure, walking with a confident carriage. She seemed at first afraid to speak,  and, with rising interest, he said courteously,    You wish to see me? Then the hermit answered:    In the time that is to come, thou shalt be a very glorious king and do  glorious deeds. He said these last words with a gleam in his eyes and a tightening  of his lips, as if he gloated over the memory of his bygone faith. It seemed now that the few  Jomsvikings who were left would have the glory of victory all to  themselves. It is  said that some saw the maidens of Odin, the Valkyrias, standing at the  prow of Hakons ship, sending forth a deadly hail of unerring arrows. he cried; and Estein saw that a  change had indeed taken place. He came to himself with a start, the sweat standing on his  forehead.

 Then Brihtnoths archers answered the challenge, and the battle began  in good earnest. She gave a little start back, her pride stung to the quick, and he  heard her breath come fast. It hit him in the  middle and killed him. Then about Friesland and the parts that are now covered  by the Zuyder Zee, and so right away south to the land of the Flemings. He began to dream, at first of confused  events and hurrying faces, and then more distinctly and vividly. She started this time indeed, and for an instant the shock of  surprise took thoughts and words away. It was the custom at such feasts as this that the high seat, or throne,  of the man whom the guests were met to do honour to, should be left  vacant until the memorial toast of the deceased, and of the mightiest  of their departed kinsmen, had been proposed. she cried faintly, and then she was trembling in King  Esteins arms. I will call Ketill and the  Orkneyman, and we four will hold council here.

 He called it the Kings War  Song. And what thing is that? He spoke little, but  always courteously, and seemed to treat him at first merely as an  addition to the live stock of the island. Then Guthmund  took up an arrow and fired it so that it struck the boats mast. I cannot give you a storm, I fear, laughed Helgi, but you can  have fighting enough tonight. And the cry was echoed upon every  side. It was in the autumntide that Olaf encountered the first serious storm. The dead could hear a landing like this. It may be that he also was  cruel, for it is told that he was stern and wrathful with all who  offended him, and that in punishing his enemies he knew no mercy.