#Test: Pirates


 Piracy is an offence against the universal law of society, a pirate being according to Sir Edward Coke, stis humani generis. Deceiving themselves in the supposition that Avery had outsailed them during the night, they held on their course to the place of rendezvouse; but, arriving there, to their sad disappointment no ship appeared. Having had no food since we got the tortoise, John Anthony and myself set out in search of fresh water, and three remained with the boat. Unshared have we left our last victorys prey;   It is mine to divide it, and yours to obey:   There are shawls that might suit a sultanas white neck,   And pearls that are fair as the arms they will deck;   There are flasks which, unseal them, the air will disclose   Diamettas fair summers, the home of the rose. He then snatched one of the flags, and retired to the interior of the tower; in a few minutes he reappeared, took a second and descended. While we lay hulling up and down, our hopes at so low an ebb, we discovered a tortoise, not far from us, asleep in the sea. Then Lord Exmouth, having seen only the smoke of the gun, before the sound reached him, said, with great alacrity, That will do; fire my fine fellows!
 She was refused, as being in every respect opposite to the description of the person sent for. He arrived off Algiers on the morning of the 27th of August, and sent in his interpreter, Mr. Then sent the boat on board for the other two men, being five in all; who came ashore, and rejoiced enough was I to see among them Thomas Young, one of my crew, who was detained on board the Mexican, but had escaped through Nickolas means; the other a Frenchman, named John Cadedt. While we were getting into her, one of my fellow prisoners, a Spaniard, attempted with tears in his eyes to speak to the captain, but was refused with the answer. She dreaded being refused, and sent back to the horrid dungeon she was leaving where no difference was paid to rank, and slaves of all conditions were huddled together. She was vain and bold in her disposition, but susceptible of the tenderest emotions, and of the most melting affections.
 She replied, that, As to hanging, she thought it no great hardship, for were it not for that, every cowardly fellow would turn pirate, and so infest the seas; and men of courage would starve. While Vane was upon this island, a ship put in there from Jamaica for water, the captain of which, one Holford, an old buccaneer, happened to be Vanes acquaintance. The stories of these two men are so interwoven with others, that it will be impossible to distinguish many of their particular actions. She indeed, frequently declared, that the life of a pirate was what she detested, and that she was constrained to it both on the former and present occasion. While they lay at anchor, and were employed in taking in water, one of the abovementioned fleet moved towards them with English colors, and was answered by the pirate with a red ensign; but they did not hail each other. She had 200,000 dollars in specie, and other valuable articles on board. He gave me reproachful words; and it is well that we did not come to blows, but I went my way, and he, seeing me resolute, followed. He says I now first opened my design to my comrades, informing them, that I had contrived the model of a boat, which, being formed in pieces, and afterwards put together, might be the means of our deliverance. While there, he had the command of a boat employed in bringing logwood to the ship. Then they ordered Captain Orgamar to leave his vessel, allowing him his trunk and turned him ashore, to seek for himself. She manned and armed two more boats for us.